aba - distribute; divide; allot; allocate; arrange; give away as a present.
abêga - become distributed among; be distributable.
abêla - distribute among; give to.
abêlana - share mutually.
abêlêla - predict; foretell.
abêlwa - being given a share.
abetswe - has been given a share.
abile - has distributed.
abisa - cause or help in sharing out.
abiwa - (same as "ajwa"), being distributed; being doled out, being shared out among.
abula - (same as "gogoba"), crawl; to move on hands and knees, as a baby would.
adile - has spread out on the ground; has made bedding ready for use.
adilwe - bedding has been made.
adima - lend; borrow.
adimaka - borrow, or lend many times, or much.
adimana - lend to, or borrow from another.
adimetse - has borrowed, or lent for the purpose of.
adimetswe - has been borrowed, or lent for the purpose of.
adimile - has lent, or borrowed.
adimisa - help or cause to borrow, or lend.
adimiwa - same as adingwa, being borrowed.
adingwa - same as adimiwa.
adisa - cause or help to prepare bedding; cause or help to spread out on the ground.
aena - iron; press. [borrowed -> English]
aene - a clothes iron, the household appliance used to press fabrics to remove wrinkles.[borrowed -> English]
aenêga - become well ironed.
aenegile - is/was well ironed, or pressed.
aenêla - press (clothing) for.
aenetse - has pressed for.
aenetswe - aenetse, has been ironed for.
aenisa - cause or help to iron.
aennê - has pressed or ironed.
afe - [enumeration] used to ask questions; which ones.
aga - build; make; construct, set up; be in the habit of.
agaka - build extensively; build much; build indiscriminately.
agana - prop one another up, spiritually, materially, etc.
agêga - become well built; be properly constructed.
agêla - build for as in “build (a house) for”.
agêlêla - fence in; build a fence around something; surround.
agêntê - (same as "mmueledi"), lawyer.
agetse - has built for the purpose of.
agile - has built; e.g. o agile ntlo = he has built a house.
agisa - cause or help to build; bring about peace.
agisana - become friends again; restore harmonious relations.
agisantsê - has restored harmonious relations.
agisantswê - have been made to become friends again.
agisanya - cause or help to restore harmonious relations.
agisanya - help to reconcile individuals who are at loggerheads.
agisitse - has helped or caused to build; has reconciled warring or feuding factions.
agiwa - (same as "agwa"), being built, constructed.
agolola - rebuild; dismantle a structure.
agwa - (same as agiwa) being built.
ahelele! - a shout of praise and gladness.
aitse - [interjection] expression of surprise, wonder.
ajwa - (same as "abiwa"), being distributed.
aka - tell lies; prevaricate.
akabadiwa - being in doubt; being puzzled; being led to wonder; being surprised; being amazed.
akabala - caught between two opinions; wonder; be bewildered; be perplexed; be amazed; hesitate.
akabatsa - bewilder; perplex; amaze; cause one to wonder.
akabatswa - (same as "akabadiwa"), being in doubt.
akafala - become an adulterer, used of either sex.
akanya - think; ponder; consider; debate in one’s mind; reason about.
akanyêga - be feasible; be considered possible.
akanyetsa - think about; devise means for; plan in advance.
akaretsa - envelop; overshadow; include.
akeditse - has lied to.
akêla - lie about; speak falsely about; gossip about.
aketsa - lie to; speak falsely to; gossip with.
aketse - has lied about; has spoken falsely about; has gossiped about.
akga - swing anything from side to side; carry by holding loosely; dangle.
akga mabôgô - let arms hang by the sides; be idle.
akgêga - be dangled; be hung down from; be swung from side to side; be pending as in a matter before a court of law; 
be hungry; be hung down loosely, of a corpse.
akgisa - cause to carry a dangling thing; cause or help to hang out loosely.
akgêla - comment; the act of commenting on a subject matter.
akgola - toss up and down; congratulate.
ako - [interjection], please; introduces a request, supplications, exhortations.
akofa - make haste; hasten; hurry; do immediately; do straightaway; hasten to; hurry to.
akofisa - (same as "akotsha"), cause to hurry; help to hasten.
akola - be happy; enjoy; be pleased; become fat.
akolwa - being enjoyed; being nice to taste.
akotsha - (same as "akofisa"), cause to hurry; help to hasten; fatten; enrich.
ala - spread out on the ground; make bedding ready for use.
alafa - cure; heal; doctor.
alafêsêga - be cured; be healed; be doctored.
alafisa - help or cause to cure, or heal.
alafiwa - (same as "alašwa"), being cured; being healed; being doctored.
alašwa - (same as "alafiwa").
ale - (of "ma" nouns), e.g. Makala ale = those camelthorn trees yonder.
ale - [enumeration] (of "ma" nouns) used to ask questions; how many.
alebamo - album. [borrowed -> English]
alêla - prepare bedding for; spread: out on the ground for.
aletare - altar. [borrowed -> English]
aloga - graduate from a programme of study; finish or complete a ceremony, as in the case of girl initiates;
alogile - has graduated from a programme of study; has finished or completed a ceremony, as in the case of girl initiates.
alola - (same as "koba"), chase away; drive away with contempt.
alola - (same as "alolola"), take up that which has been spread on the floor; to rearrange bedding after use.
alolêla - take up that which has been spread on the floor on someone else’s behalf; chase something or someone away to the detriment of someone.
alolola - (same as "alola"), take up that which has been spread on the floor; to rearrange bedding after use.
alosa - prepare for and carry out a graduation ceremony.
aluminiamo - aluminium. [borrowed -> English]
ama - touch; come in contact with, hence have sexual relations with; refer to.
amagana - (see also "amana"), touch each other.
amaganya - (as in "amanya" and "kgomisa"), make things touch each other.
amana - touch each other; be adjacent to, as of things that have a common border; be related one to the other.
ambulense - ambulance. [borrowed -> English]
amênê - amen.[borrowed -> Hebrew]
amile - has touched; has touched feelings.
ammaaruri - truth.
amoga - take away from; take without leave; take contrary to owner’s wish, despoil; deprive of.
amogana - (same as "fapaanêla"), take turns at.
amogêla - receive; take that which is offered; be paid wages due.
amogêlêsêga - be acceptable; be well received, or appreciated.
amogelesegile - has been acceptable; has been well received, or appreciated.
amogile - has taken away from; has taken without leave; has deprived of.
amola - (same as "kgetla"), peel the leaves off a branch; pluck/cut/break a branch/twig off a tree.
amologanya - separate mutually.
amologanye - have separated by mutual consent.
amologile - have become divided, as friends, or as links of a chain.
amolola - disconnect; disjoin; disunite. 
ampo - (same as "kampo"), perhaps; possibly.
amule - has suckled.
amuwa - (same as "anyiwa"), being suckled; mainly used in instances where the baby or calf is being suckled by a foster mother.
ana - (same as "bina"), tell; relate; venerate; treat as sacred.
anama - spread out, as of tree roots, stretch of land, rumour, a people.
anamêla - spread out or towards.
anametse - has spread out into, or to.
anamisa - cause or make something spread out.
ananya - exchange; barter.
anapa - feel after; grope, in search of.
anêga - spread anything out to dry, or air.
anegile - has spread anything out to dry; has aired a thing.
anêla - narrate.
angwa - (same as "amiwa"), being touched, either emotionally or physically.
anoga - same as apoga, break up and disappear, as darkness or clouds.
anogile - has broken up and disappeared, as darkness, or clouds.
anola - cause to break up and disappear, as darkness.
anya - draw (milk or some other fluid) into the mouth; imbibe knowledge, or skill.
anyile - (same as "amule"), has suckled.
anyisa - to suckle; to nurse.
anyoga - Strip; throw off clothing.
anyolola - to cut straight poles.
aoa - [interjection] alas; alack.
apa apa - (same as "anapa"), grope, or feel with hands or fingers. 
apara - wear; put on garments.
aparêla - to menstruate.
aparwa - being put on; being dressed.
apatla - grope to feel one’s way, as a blind or drunken man; travel by a road not known; feel one’s way when speaking about an unfamiliar subject.
apatlile - has felt one’s way, as a blind man; has travelled by a road not known; has felt one’s way when speaking about an unfamiliar subject.
apaya - cook; question closely.
apêêga, - be cooked; get questioned closely.
apeegile - is/was well cooked.
apêêla - cook for; prepare a meal(s) for. 1.Expr, go apééla thukwi le mala.
apeile - has cooked, is in the process of cooking.
apeisa - cause someone to cook; help someone cook.
apere - is clothed; has worn.
apesa - clothe; help to put on clothing, hence provide for with clothing and other necessities; cover completely with something.
apesiwa - (same as "apeswa"), being clothed; being provided for.
apoga - undress; clear, as of smoke, clouds or mystery; used of trees it means bare, or unbarked.
apola - undress; uncover.
apole - apple. [borrowed -> English]
apolwa - being undressed.
apotsê - has undressed; has uncovered.
apotswê - has been undressed; has been uncovered, or unveiled.
ara - cut open a swelling, or tumour; perform a surgical operation.
araba - answer; reply.
arabile - has responded to someone’s request, or call; has answered, or replied.
arajwa - (same as "arabiwa"), being answered; being replied to.
arameditse - has caused or made to bask in the sun; has made to inhale medicinal fumes or vapours or steam.
arameditswe - has been caused or made to bask in the sun; has been made to inhale medicinal fumes or vapours or steam.
aramediwa - being warm in the sun; being made to inhale smoke, or steam, as medicine.
aramêla - inhale medicinal smoke, or steam; bask in the sun;
arametsa - cause to inhale medicinal smoke or steam fumes or vapours; help or make bask in the sun.
arametse - has basked in the sun; has inhaled medicinal vapours or fumes, or steam.
arêga - bleed; withdraw blood.
areka - ark. [borrowed -> English]
arêla - has performed a surgical operation for; has cut open a swelling or tumour for.
arile - has performed a surgical operation; has cut open a swelling or tumour.
arogantsê - aroganya, has separated, as friends; has divided lengthwise.
aroganya - cleave asunder; divide lengthwise; separate, as friends.
arola - make a gaping wound; make a large opening in a sore.
arotsê - has made a gaping wound; has made a large opening in a sore.
aseporine - aspirin. [borrowed -> English]
asêtsa - hold out a hand for something not forthcoming; attempt to hold, or touch something without any success.
ata - increase, or multiply, of people and animals; be finished, in taking turns at doing something.
atamalana - come close to one another; approach each other.
atameditse - has drawn nearer; has brought nearer.
atameditswe - has been drawn nearer; has been brought nearer.
atamediwa - being drawn nearer; being brought nearer.
atamêla - (same as "atumêla"), approach; come near; draw near.
atametsa - same as atumetsa. cause to come near; bring closer; draw near.
atametse - has approached; has moved close to; has drawn near to.
atêga - be clothed; be covered with something to hide nakedness; become increased.
ategile - has become increased.
atêla - increase, or multiply to the benefit of.
atemirala - admiral. [borrowed -> English]
aterêsê - address. [borrowed -> English]
atile - have multiplied; have increased (people and animals).
atisa - cause or help to increase, or to multiply; usually; in the habit of.
atisitse - has caused to increase, or multiply.
atla - kiss; welcome; show appreciation; reward for services nominally rendered without payment.
atla atla - kiss a lot; kiss on and off.
atlabala - extend; spread out.
atlabatsa - spread out, or extend.
atlafala - bungle; work carelessly, or clumsily; err; make a gross mistake either through carelessness or incapacity.
atlana - hug each other, kiss each other; fondle each other; welcome each other; reward each other.
atlanêgêla - be too much for; become too much for. *
atlanegetse - has become too much for.
atlanya -  cause two to embrace.
atlapa - (same as "paputla" and "anapa"), grope, feel about, as a blind man, etc.
atlarêla - receive with open arms or hands; receive with hands spread out; show appreciation; be grateful; catch rain water by means of surfaces such as corrugated iron sheets; enclose.
atlaretsa - help the recipient to open both hands.
atlaretse - has received with both hands.
atlatlêla - provide medicine, or food for a sick person.
atlêga - be kissable; be rewarded; be successful; become successful; be spread; become spread out.
atlegile - has become successful; is/was welcome, or successful.
atlêla - kiss on account of; kiss on someone else’s behalf; reward for services nominally rendered without payment.
atlelase - atlas. [borrowed -> English]
atlêlwa - being rewarded for; being embraced for.
atlhama - broad; wide; open the mouth wide.
atlhame - has become broad, or wide; has opened the mouth wide.
atlhamêla - open wide for; open wide into; open the mouth wide, in surprise.
atlhamisa - cause to be wide open; make broad, or open.
atlhamisetsa - made wide open for.
atlhamisitse - has made wide open; has made broad.
atlhamisitswe - has been made wide open.
atlhamiswa - (same as "atlhamisiwa"), being caused to be wide open, being made broad.
atlhamologa - become more open.
atlhamologile - has become wide open; has become more open, used mainly in the case where the thing being made wide open is inanimate.
atlhamolosa - atlhamolola, make wide open; enlarge an opening.
atlhamolositse - has caused to become wide open; has enlarged an opening.
atlhamolositswe - has been caused to become wide open; has been enlarged, as an opening.
atlhoga - decidable; state of becoming decided; state of judgment beingimminent.
atlhogile - acceptable verdict has been reached.
atlhola - decide; judge; arbitrate; pass sentence.
atlholêla - judgment; find an individual guilty.
atlholetse - has passed judgment on.
atlhotsê - has judged; has passed judgment.
atlhotswê - has been judged; judgment has been passed.
atomo - atom. [borrowed -> English]
atsa - squirt, as from a syringe.
atswa - reward; pay for a service rendered including that done on a part time basis; give a token reward; punish by caning; make good a loss, especially that sustained by the needy; give to needy.
atswile - has given to the needy; has rewarded.
atumêla - (same as "atamêla"), approach.
atumêlana - (same as "atamêlana"), draw near to each other.
aubuti - elder brother. [borrowed -> Afrikaans]
ausi - elder sister. [borrowed -> Afrikaans]
