ba 1sT ELEMENT - baand cv.1A. bo-. ADJ.CONC. ba ba-. batho ba bantsho, black people; bontshe ba batuba, brown ostriches.
ba - & 2a, Poss. conc. when followed by and then -etsho, a pronoun, or a noun expresses relationship, location and possession.; bana ba ga malomê (the children of my uncle), my cousins; batho ba ga Monare (the people of Monare), Monare's people; batho ba ga Thamaga, residents of Thamaga.
ba - &2A, REL. conc. ba ba-.; bokgêngwê ba ba botlhoko, wild watermelons that are bitter; batho ba ba buang, people who are speaking.
ba - & 2A, SUBJ. CONC. (SHORT FORM), ba bua thata they speak a lot.
ba - & 2A, SUBJ. CONC. NON V. PRED., bokgêngwê ba botlhoko, the wild watermelons are bitter; batho ba tala, people are uncouth.
ba - & 2A, ENUM. CONC, used with the stems -sele; -fe; -pe; -ngwe.; batho ba sele, other people or different people; bontlole bafe? which spring hares? bonnale bape, certain or whichever needles; bosantlhokwe bangwe, certain gall-bladders.
ba - &2a. poss. conc.; bana ba me my children. baa baand 2A bosuBJ. CONC. (LONG FORM), batho ba a bua, the people speak; bontshê ba a fula, the ostriches are grazing.
baabedwi - (same as "baabêlwa"), partakers; those who receive shares of something.
baabi - givers; distributors.
baadi - bedding mates, or maidens.
baadimani - mutual borrowers or lenders.
baadimi - borrowers or lenders.
baagedi - inhabitants; tizens.
baagêlani - neighbours.
baagi - builders; constructors.
baakafadi - adulterers.
baakantsê - has prepared; has repaired; has made ready or set in order.
baakantswê - has been repaired, put right, etc.
baakanya - repair; set in order.
baakanyeditse - has repaired for, etc.
baakanyeditswe - has been got ready for; has been prepared for.
baakanyêga - (same as "baakanyêsêga become fixed"), or repaired.
baakanyêsêga - fixed, or repaired.
baakanyesegile - has been fixed, or repaired.
baakanyetsa - prepare for; get ready for; repair for.
baaki - idle talkers, often ill-natured; gossipers.
baanêlwa - (same as "mophetwa"), character in a literary work.
baangwa - (same as "baakantswê"), being prepared; being repaired; being got ready.
baanya - (same as "baakanya"), prepare; repair; get ready; put in order.
baaposetoloi - apostles; the twelve men chosen by Jesus to spread his teaching; leaders or teachers of a new faith or movement [borrowed].
baba - enemies.
baba - to irritate, or be irritable; bitter; pungent; to scorch.
bababenyane - abject people.
babadi - counters; enumerators.
babaêla - walk softly on account of tender or sore feet; walk stealthily.
babalabadi - rumour mongers; gossipers.
babalêla - care for; provide for; take care of; burn, as the sun's rays; burden either physically or emotionally.
babalêsêga - state of being cared for; smart like a burn or scald.
babalesegile - has been cared for; has smarted like a burn.
babalêtse - has cared for; has taken care of; has struck, as sun's rays.
babantsê - has cracked.
babantswê - has been cracked.
babanya - (same as "ranyêga"), crack, as a pot in the fire.
babanyêga - êga, become cracked, as an earthen vessel, or wood being worked into shape; be denied with vehemence; be strongly denied.
babapatsi - traders; sellers; buyers.
babatli - seekers; searchers; group requesting permission for their kin to marry.
babea - See babaêla, walk softly on account of tender or sore feet; walk stealthily.
babedi - s., two (people).
babêla - decorate wooden spoons, etc. by burning marks on them; do pokerwork; itch, or even rash caused by nettles, etc.; bitter pungent taste induced by eating certain spices.
babelafadi - braggers; boasters.
babelegi - nurses; carriers; burden-bearers.
babelegisi - midwives.
babêlwa - being irritated.
babenyana - abject; miserable.
babeodi - shavers; hair-dressers; barbers.
babereki - (FoR) workers; labourers.
babetse - has done pokerwork for or on ornamental art.
babobodi - sick people (both emotional and physical sickness).
babodi - ], News tellers.
babodufadi - indolent people; lazy people.
baboga - become scorched, or singed.
babogedi - observers.
babogile - or scorched.
babola - scorch; singe; parched, as corn.
babolai - murderers; killers; assassins.
baboledi - tellers of news; reporters; news mongers.
babêtlana - bapL. or mmêtlana, younger ones; small ones. pim. mmêtlanyana.
babêtlanyana - very young ones.
babuisi - readers; debaters; instigators.
badile - has read; has done a particular standard at school.
badilwe - have been counted, or read.
badima - appear; shine; flash, as lightning; glisten.
badimile - has appeared; has flashed, as lightning; has glistened; has shone, as a new moon.
badimo - Spirits; ancestors, ranging from one's parents who are still alive to the dead and long forgotten ones; believed to influence or control events.
badingwana - ancestors; conscience.
badirammôg6 - personnel; staff; co-workers; associates.
badiredi - employees.
badiri - workers; employees.
badisa - herdsmen; guards, as of prisoners; keepers.
badisa - enable or help to read; enable or help to count.
baditšhaba - (same as "batswakwa"), foreigners; baditshaba ba nonotsha lefatshe, foreigners are an asset to a nation; setshaba, a nation.
baebela_ - sina. oF dibaebela, Bible; the name < thamaga ya boJeso is rarely used.
baefangele - baoF moefangele evangelist [borrowed].
baelegisi - DIAL. VAR. babelegisi, which is commonly used, midwives.
baeng - similar to baeti strangers; guests; visitors.
baesekele - bicycle. baesekôp6_N. bioscope; nema [borrowed].
baeti - strangers; travellers.
baetsi - imitators.
bafaladi - refugees.
bafe - s., mainly used to ask questions; usage depends on context. I want anyone, ke batla le fa e le bafe; ''m not particular as to who I want to see, bafe le bafe.
bafokwa - lit., those whom the wind has blown over and thus eansed; consecrated people.
bafula - female servants; ke mofula wa Morêna, I am the servant of the Lord.
bagadika - bagadikane and mogadikane are commonly used; rivals; generally wives of one man but also used of daughter-in-law and husband's mother. Expresses rivalry that exists in certain marriage relationships.
bagaladi - ba-.
balalediwa - invited guests. Note that among the Batswana, the idea of coming or not coming because you are invited is a fairly new thing. It were relatives that lived far away from one that got invited, the rest came on their own.
balatedi - those that identify with a particular. leader.
bale - those yonder.
balekeletsi - those that test a competitor's skill; those that try something out to learn of its capabability, researchers, investigators, those that scrutinize.
balela - read for, count for.
balela - to make a loud deep throated cough as when choking on food or drink; choke when a food morsel or some liquid goes down the glottis instead of through the oesophagus.
balelana - watch one another as to the number of times one makes mistakes; read for each other.
baleti - waiters on; those that watch out for the corn eating birds just before harvesting.
baletsi - those that play the instruments.
balola - go through all and in great detail, go through all the faults committed; count all and sundry.
balolola - erate, state all in particular the wrongs committed.
balololaka - go through all and in great detail, go through all the faults committed; count all and sundry.
balololela - erate all for the benefit of etc.
ban-ka-bone - their partner, their neighbour, their confidant/ confidante.
ban-ka-lona - your (pl) partner, your (pl) neighbours; your (pl) confidante/confidante.
ban-ka-nna - my 11A partners, my neighhbours,; my confidant/ confidante.
ban-ka-rona - our partner, our neighbour, our cofidant/ confidante.
ban-ka-wena - your partners, your neighbours, your confidant/ confidante.
bama - these ones here, very much near me the speaker.
bana - children not distinguished by sex gender.
banana - young ones, little ones; the undefiled (sexually), the innocent.
bano - S. OF IST positon, nearest to the speaker, those very much near me the speaker.
banyana - a child, a boy child, a girl child nb. that nowadays the word is used as though it were refering only to girls. DEMS QUAL. 2ND Pos., those next to you.
bapa - be side by side; be parallel, be near each other, side by side without touching.
bapadisa - cause one to gather things such as fruits etc. help or induce one to gather.
bapaditse - particular, as to the number of times that as to the number of times; read for each other.
bapala - gather precious things, gather collect.
bapalela - gather for as in idiomatic expression, korwe ke bapalela tsetsi, "as a hornbill I gather food for the new mother.".
bapaletsa - ertise to a prospective customer, talk someone into taking an interest at buying particular merchandise.
bapaletsanya - ertise on behalf of one another; sell each others wares.
bapaletsanya - say good things about each other.
bapatsa - display wares with the hope that someone will take an interest in buying them, talk someone into buying some wares; PROV. mmapatsi phokwana o tsamaya a ntshitse.
bapatsanya - say good things about each other.
bapetse - have gathered.
bapisa - discretely go alongside, thus keeping a watch on, as does an escort or bodyguard.:.
bapisaka - keep a very close watch on, keep under strict supervision.
bapisega - to be kept watch on to be kept under supervision.
bapola - outstretch and nail as a wet skin; nail on the CROSS, the way Our Lord was treated.
bara - or) bars, beer drinking places.
baratwiN - loved ones, those that are dear to one.
barobi - >roba, literally, the ones that break; the harvesters.
baroka - a tainmaker, a who dabbles in herbs and divining bones.
baroma - romans.
baromi - senders. The word barongwa, messengers, is in common usage.
barulaganyi - those that arrange, the key people. Note that the word /enaneo that is used in place of thulaganyo is a fairly new borrowing from S.Sotho, and to an extent irritating to older folks.
barutwa - students; scholars.
barutwana - young learners.
barutwi - (same as "barutwa").
barwa - male children.
barwadi - daughters.
barweetsana - girls.
baa - young people, teenagers; people in a new situation.
bašaga - A people belonging to the Saga an, regarded as the indigenous inhabitants of the Kweneng district.
basekaseki - those that something, try something out, evaluators.
bata - (For), baths, big metal containers that people wash whole bodies oversized dishes used for doing laundry.
bata - slap with an open hand, clap; beat. prov. seboba re bata sa mokwatla, sa mpa re a mpampetsa.
batalala - lie in hiding, lie stretched out as not to be noticed. prov. sekukuni ga se ke thoka sebataladi.
batalaota - a community has an affinity to the kalanga.
batela - promiscuous; engage in love affairs whose sole purpose is to have a relationship; undesirable sexual relationship.
batla - want, seek, search, desire, look used as a verb complement, to express wanted, as in ke batlile go bona, I nearly saw, I wanted to see; ke batla go bona, I want to see.
batladiki - those that speak ill of others in an underhanded and suggestive manner.
batlaka - want extensively.
batlana - /a, want each other, search for one another.
batlega - be precious; be highly desirable.
batlela - want for.
batlelana - seek for some form of convenience on behalf of each other, ¢.g. as listening out for accomodation or some mode of transport that may be of benefit to the other.
batihale - wise people the wise.
batihanka wn - servants.
batlhano - STEM USED WITH ASSOCIATIVE ba le to express, they being five, ba le batlhano.
batlhatlei - those that ready the cooking pots on the fire in preparation for the more experienced cooks.
batlhodi - a spy.
batlhokwa - PROBABLY people of the Batlokwa tribe.
batlhomedi - armed people; people arrayed in armour.
batlisa - assist in looking for something that is lost.
batlisisa - look for intensively; conduct research.
batlisisitse - done a thorough search, searched for intensively, researched thoroughly and carefully.
batliwa - (same as "batlwa"), be sought after; be wanted as though one is lost. batlwa Vv. s. Pass. SAME AS batliwa, be looked for; be test searched for.
batodisa - cause or help to sharpen a spear or axe by beating it out; cause or help to in; slap with an open hand.
batola - sharpen a spear by beating it out.
batolela - on someone elses behalf.
batsantsabetsi - that careful or meticulous workers.
batsetseleki - artistic creative or imaginative workers.
batshedi - oF living persons.
batswapong - a tribal community found in north eastern Botswana.
bautswa - thieves.
bawetsi - 2 > wetsa, those that finish off. 11B galala, grumblers; dissatisfied persons; malcontents.
bagale - the victor (of a war).
bagani - ectors; refusers; rejectors; opponents.
bagapi - captors; people who take captives or booty.
bagapiwa - (same as "bagatswa"), or bagatswi, captives; prisoners of war.
bagatswi - to take captive; captives.
bagobagobetsi - hard taskmasters; oppressors.
bagodi - those who have grown and are seniors; more important people; people of note.
bagêga-banyana - (to lead), catchers, instructors.
bagogaie - old people.
bagogi - lit. ones who pull, or attract; leaders; church elders.
bagogwadi - parentsin-law of the fiancee.
bagolo - elders; grown-up people.
bagolwane - elderly people; people of high rank.
bagêma - imperious people.
bagomodiwa - the comforted or consoled ones.
bagomotsi - comforters; consolers.
bagwê - sons-in-law. The term is also used to include men and women of the in-law group.
bahumagadi - chief's wives; women of importance; mistresses.
bahumanegi - poor people; the poor.
bahutsanyi - those who curse each other.
baiji - to destroy oneself; self-destructors.
baikepi - ba-, wicked people; iniquitous people; evil people.
baikgogomosi - proud people; conceited people.
baiki - (same as "bake"), wood-boring beetles.
baila - walk with turned-out toes.
baipolêdi - lit., those who confess or tell who they are; confessors; enquirers.
baititaaganyi - arrogant people; malcontents; fault-finders.
baitlotli - tlotla to respect honourable people; those who respect themselves.
baitoleganyi - arrogant people.
baitseanape - know and nape, diviners; practitioners in the art of divination; experts (in particular fields or arts); skilled people.
bajaki - people who stay for a purpose; people who sell their labour for kind, as labourers who are given a measure of the harvest.
baka - reason.
baka - praise in song; eulogise; extol; applaud, same as haka (dial.); cease from doing an undesirable thing, often as a result of severe punishment or reprimand; cause to happen; catalytic.
bakabi - people who mend punctures or holes.
bakaedi - veEr.F. kaêla same as matsaya-tsela, girl guides.
bakaidi - pveEr.F. Kaila wanderers.
bakaidikaidi - hopeless wanderers; those who wander about aimlessly.
bakapi - a term used of the earliest Christians.
bakapi - lit., those who catch; photographers; catchers; a term used of early Christians.
bakatakomena - catechumens; converts to be baptised into the Christian faith [borrowed].
bakaulengwe - fellow men; neighbours; brothers.
bakêga - be praised; be applauded; be made to happen; worthy of praise.
bakêla - praised on account of something achieved; cease from doing an undesirable thing; come to happen to a third party. It is not easy to make a distinction in meaning between baka and bakêla. asa prep., bakêla must take a complement, as in o tlaa bakêla go utswa, he will cease stealing.
bakêlwa - being caused trouble by; being discouraged from doing wrong.
bala - read; count.
be - bad; ugly; evil. Takes conc. that agrees with the N., OF PRON.; qualified; batho ba babe, bad people; sekad se sebe, ugly example. In form there is no difference with NON V. PRED. constructions; batho ba babe, the people are bad; sekaê se sebe, the example is ugly. Note that the socalled strong nouns cause the b >p, as in kgomo e mpe.
be - used in multiverbal prep. It has various shades of meaning that depend much on the context. On the whole it can be said to signify future tense, conditional mood and participial or dependent actions; re be re sia, we should run away (instantly, immediately); re tlaa be re gorêga, we will be arriving (by then, very definitely, or without any doubt); same as bo.
bêa - hedge; make a hedge or fence. Note that a traditional fence was made of tree branches.
bêba - cool, used of anger or heat.
bebentsê - has trembled, as lips would.
bebentsha - cause to tremble, as lips would; glitter, or flash like a sword in the sun.
bebentshitse - has caused to tremble, has glittered, or flashed like a sword in the sun.
bebenya - similar to memeya, plaster or smear with; tremble, as the lips of an angry or amused person; flash, like distant lightning; as a flame or fire.
bebile - has subsided.
bedile - has fermented; has boiled.
bedisa - cause to boil; cause to become sour.
bedisêga - become fermented.
bedisetsa - make a liquid to boil for the purpose of; ferment for the purpose of.
bedisisa - boil for more time than is necessary; cause to overboil; help to boil or ferment.
bedisitse - has put on to boil; has fermented.
bedisitswe - has been put on to boil; has been fermented.
bedisiwa - being fermented; being boiled.
beditse - has thrashed; has beaten, or spanked.
beditswe - (same as "betswa"), has been spanked; has been beaten.
bediwa - (same as "betswa"), being beaten, or thrashed.
beegile - has become safely kept or well kept.
bêêla - keep reserve, store on someone's behalf; lay egg(s). prov.lenaga ga le beele.
beêla - hedge; make a hedge or fence for.
bêêlana - keep something for each other; store for one another.
bêêleditse - (same as "bêêletse has engaged to marry"),; has set aside to have later.
beeleditse - has placed a receptacle to catch and store liquid, as rain water; has done something to help ease a burden, like putting a cushion under a horse's saddle.
beeleditswe - has been placed to catch and store a liquid, such as a vessel; has been placed to ease a burden.
beeleditswe - (same as "beeletswe"), has been engaged to be married; is engaged to be married.
bêêlêga - can be booked in advance; can be engaged.
bêêlêla - engage to marry; set aside to have later.
bêêlêlwa - being engaged to be married.
beeletsa - such as rain water; place something under a burden.
beeletswe - has been engaged to be married; Marea o beeletswe, Mary is engaged.
beeletswe - (same as "beeleditswe"), has been engaged to be married; is engaged to be married.
bêêlwa - being put aside for; being kept for.
befa - (same as "bifa"), show displeasure.
befedisiwa - being made to shun; being made to pass by without speaking.
befêga - become changed, as a countenance.
bega - become spoken about; report.
bega - find a lost thing; find and kill a wild animal that had been wounded by someone else; report a matter; make a.
begêga - reportable.
begêla - make a report to; make a report; the distinction between begêla and begêlêla is unclear.
begetse - has made a report to.
begetswe - has been reported to.
begile - has reported; has found a lost thing.
begilwe - has been reported.
begisa - help to find that which was lost.
begisitse - has helped, or caused to report a matter; has helped to find that which was lost.
begisitswe - has been helped to report a matter; has been helped to find that which was lost.
begisiwa - (same as "begiswa being made to report"),; being helped to find that which was lost.
begiswa - (same as "begisiwa").
begiwa - being reported; be found, that which has been lost accidentally.
begwa - (same as "begiwa").
beile - has put; has reserved, stored, or saved as money in a bank.
beilwe - has been put away, has been reserved, stored, or saved, as money in a bank.
beisa - help or cause to save.
beisa - compete especially in racing; run fast.
beisane - basin [borrowed].
beisetsa - run for a special reason, such as a special occasion or a reward.
beisetswa - being competed for, as in a running event.
beisisa - help to run a race.
beisitse - has made to put away.
beisitse - has raced.
beisitswe - has been raced.
beisitswe - has been made to keep something.
beisiwa - (same as "beiswa"), being made or helped to put away; being raced.
beiswa - (same as "beisiwa").
beiwa - (same as "bêwa"), being kept or put away.
beka - affront; offend; treat with indignity, or contempt; presume; be unsuitable for one's position.
beka - cut meat into thin slices; make biltong; take a wife to her new home.
bekana - hurt one another's feelings.
bekara - ulate, used of rams and hegoats.
bekarwa - being serviced, by a ram or he-goat.
beke - same as tshipi week [borrowed].
bekêga - be cut into thin slices; be affronted, or offended; grieve.
bekegile - has become cut into thin slices; has become affronted, or offended.
bekêla - cut into thin slices for the purpose of.
bekêlwa - being cut into thin slices for a purpose.
bekere - beaker [borrowed].
bekerwe - has been serviced by aram, or he-goat. 1p. expr. go di tlhaolêla di bekerwe.
besitse - has roasted, has grilled has baked; has made a fire.
besiwa - broiled or baked.
besolola - roast, grill or bake again; make, or start a fire again.
beta - > betabeta, wrestle; choke each other.
betaganye - are packed tightly together.
betêga - have sore throat.
betegile - has become choked.
betêlwa - be choked.
betia - patch.
betiwa - (same as "betwa"), be choked by.
betlama - shine forth; be exposed.
betlêga - become carved or sculpted, as wood, stone, etc. betlêga-peto v. pur, be weary.
betlile - has worked with an adze; has shaped a stone; has planed wood.
betliwa - (same as "betlwa"), being shaped; being carved, etc. prov. moremogolo go betlwa wa taola wa motho o a ipetla.
betogile - [arcu], is/was displeased, or crying without cause.
betologile - has swollen and protruded.
betsegile - has gushed out; has come out with force; has rushed out.
betšha - bet.
betsho pr - my people.
betsi - (same as "dingwetsi"), daughters-in-law.
betswa - (same as "< bediwa"), being beaten; being spanked; being lashed with a whip.
betwa - (same as "betiwa"), being choked; being drowned. 1p.expr. go betwa ke pelo, to lose one's temper, become angry.
bêwa - being placed; being put away; being given a plot of land for a home, etc.; same as beiwa.
biba - [D}, express thanks.
bibila - walk alone in a lonely place particularly said of a child.
bibile - has expressed thanks.
bibing - uae. bobibing, a bird of the eagle or vulture species. bidibidi reps, very many; throngs.
bidibitla - as does a stout person.
bidibitlêga - be running fast but clumsily.
bidibitlegile - has run fast but clumsily.
bidiêla - become swollen.
bidietse - became swollen.
bidikama - roll about on the ground or bed; wallow; tonki e a bidikama, a donkey wallows in the dust.
bidikamaka - roll about on the ground etc., needlessly and shamelessly.
bidikame - has rolled about on the ground, or in bed.
bidikamêga - rolled about on the ground, etc.
bidikamêla - roll about on the ground, or in bed on account of something.
bidikamêlwa - being rolled for the purpose of.
bidikamisa - cause to roll about on the ground, or in bed; cause to wallow.
bidikamisitse - rolled about on the ground, or in bed.
bidikamisitswe - has been made to roll about on the ground, or in bed.
bidikamisiwa - (same as "bidikangwa"), be made to roll about on the ground or in bed.
bidikamiwa - (same as "bidikangwa"), being rolled about on the back.
bidiladitse - is/was in the wrong place.
bidilala -! be in the wrong place.
bidilêga - put things in the wrong place, or carelessly strew about.
bidilegile - has put things in the wrong place.
bidilegilwe - has been put in the wrong place.
bidiletse - is in the wrong place.
bidisa - to make boil to turn sour as in meal, milk; a first step in the process of brewing beer.
bidisaka - in large quantities.
bidisediwa - being fermented for the purpose of.
bidisediwa - (same as "bidisetswa"), being fermented for; being boiled for the purpose of.
bidisêga - has been fermented.
bidisegile - is well fermented.
bidisetsa - ferment or boil for the purpose of.
bidisetswa - (same as "bidisediwa"), being fermented or being boiled for the purpose of.
biditse - has called, invited, etc.
biditswe - has been called invited, etc.
bidiwa - (same as "bitswa"), being called; being invited.
bifa - 's countenance; frown; look sorrowful or disappointed; let the countenance fall; deteriorate morally; become evil; be angry; appear upset; scold.
bifaka - show great displeasure; be very angry; be easily provoked; frown; look very sorrowful or disappointed; let the countenance fall, for no particular reason.
bifedisa - cause to dislike a thing greatly.
bifedisisa - to dislike a thing.
bifedisitse - has caused to dislike.
bifedisitswe - has been made to shun; has been made to pass by without speaking.
bifêga - become changed, as the weather.
bifêla - look down on, because of disrespect or ill will; dislike; despise; cut short; pass by without speaking a word; look at in a disappointed or upset way; frown at.
bifêlana - shun each other.
bifêlane - have shunned each other.
bifêlanwa - disregarding one another intentionally.
bifêlanwe - have intentionally disregarded one another.
bifêlwa - being ignored; being shunned.
bifetse - has ignored; has shunned, etc.
bifetswe - has been ignored, ete.
bifile - has shown displeasure by his countenance; has frowned; has looked sorrowful, or disappointed; has deteriorated morally; has become evil, etc.
bifisa - look sorrowful or disappointed; make angry; make vicious.
bifisisa - 1nr., be made extremely vicious.
bifisisiwa - being made very ferocious; being made extremely furious.
bifisiwa - being made furious.
bii - hush; a call to draw the attention of potential protectors.
bikini - bikini [borrowed].
bila - the first born of the human family.
biladitse - has eaten all the food, or drunk all the drink; has devoured, as by locusts.
biladitswe - has been eaten up, or drunk; has been devoured, as by locusts.
biladiwa - (same as "bilatswa being all eaten up"), or all drunk; being all devoured, as by locusts.
bilatsa - to eat up all the food; to drink up all the drink; to devour.
bilatswa - eat up all the food, or drink up all the drink; devour everything like locusts.
bile - ¢-, the Setswana, first born of the human family.
bile - already; frequently used conjunctively.
bileditse - has called for.
bileditswe - has been called for.
bilediwa - (same as "biletswa being called for"), or to.
biletsa - call to; call for; invite; summon.
biletsana - call each other for.
biletsanwa - being called by each other.
biletsanwe - have been called by one another.
biletsanye - have called one another.
biletswa - (same as "bilediwa being called for").
biloga - < bilo, shoot up as water from a fountain; bubble up; come up, as fish, or duck from water.
bilogaka - usually something coming out of water.
bilogile - has shot up, as water from a fountain; bubbled up, as fish or duck from water.
bilola - cause to gush forth.
bina - dance; venerate a tribal totem.
bina bina - dance for joy.
binêga - danced.
binêla - dance on account of; dance for.
binêlwa - being danced.
binika - ¢-, (For), vinegar.
binne - has danced.
binnwe - has been danced.
bintsha - make dance; supervise dancers; wag the tail.
bintshana - dance together.
bintshitse - has caused to dance; has wagged the tail; has been supervised while dancing.
bintshitswe - has been made to dance; has been supervised while dancing.
bintshiwa - (same as "bintshwa being made to dance"),; being supervised while dancing.
binwa - (same as "biniwa"), being danced, being acknowledged as one's totem.
binyolo - %.-, string instrument; violin.
bipa - cover up; conceal; hide by not revealing, as a secret.
bipaka - do everything possible to cover up; conceal, or not reveal a secret.
bipana - cover each other, as with blankets; help not to expose each other; protect one another.
bipanwa - being covered up by each other.
bipêga - become covered, concealed, or hidden.
bipegile - has become covered concealed, or hidden.
bipêla - cover, hide or conceal; cause constipation.
bipêlwa - have indigestion.
bipêlwa - being covered; being constipated.
bipile - has covered up; has concealed; has hidden.
bipilwe - has been covered concealed, or hidden; is covered, is hidden; go bipilwe, it is covered.
bipisa - help to cover up, conceal, or hide.
bipisisa - 1nT, cover up, conceal, or hide fully.
bipisiwa - being helped to conceal; being concealed.
bipiwa - (same as "bitswa"), be covered; be concealed; be hidden.
bipologa - become uncovered; become exposed.
bipolola - uncover; expose; disclose by uncovering; remove a cover, as a curtain.
bipolotsê - unveiled; has uncovered.
bipolotswê - has been unveiled; has been uncovered. bisa NEG. PRED. CONSTRUCTION, used in infinitive constructions, like go bisa go bêna, not to see, without seeing. pRov.,go bisa go bitsa motho go bitsa Modimo.
bisikiti - (FoR), biscuit.
bitamini - on., vitamin [borrowed].
biti-bitiaka - intently constantly, etc., as a poor person, or miser.
bitia - patch; mend.
bitiaka - darn a lot of holes in a thing.
bitiana - say unpleasant things to each other; be involved in a squabble.
bitiêla - patch for the purpose of.
bitiêlwa - being mended or being patched for the purpose of.
bitiile - has mended.
bitiilwe - has been mended; has been patched.
bitiisa - help to mend; help to patch.
bitiisisa - 1vr, mend to perfection; overdo the mending.
bitiisiwa - being helped to mend; being helped to patch. bitiiwa_v.s. pass, being mended; being patched.
bitiolola - undo a patch; unmend.
bitiolotsê - has undone a patch; has unmended.
bitiriolo - sulphuric acid; vitriol [borrowed].
bitla - as a sore eye; search for hidden things.
bitlaka - rub much with the finger; search for hidden insects, as on a jerkin made of skins.
bitlêga_ - be soothed by being rubbed with the finger. bitlêla_v.s. app. rub with the finger for the purpose of.
bitlisa - rub with the finger, as a sore eye.
bitlisisa - 1nr, a sore eye has been rubbed.
bitlisiwa_ - being made to rub an eye.
bitliwa - being rubbed with the finger, as.a sore eye.
bitsa - call; cry out; draw attention of.
bitsa bitsa - call frequently, or repeatedly; call in a fading voice.
bitsaka - call continuously or excitedly, as someone in desperation.
bitsakantsê - has called for desperately.
bitsakanya - call repeatedly.
bitsakwa - being called frantically.
bitsana - call each other; invite one another.
bitsanya - call one another.
bitswa - (same as "bidiwa"), being called, invited, etc.
bitšwa - (same as "bipiwa"), being covered.
bišôpômogolo - ¢., archbishop [borrowed].
bja - belch, pass wind. bo there are various forms of bo. They differ in tone, use and meaning. Context plays a key role in distinguishing one from the others. bo 1sT &2ND ELEMENT CL.14 ADJ. CONC. bo bo-.; bojang bo bontlê, beautiful grass. bo 1ST & 2ND ELEM. OF NON V. PRED. CONC. bojang bo bontlê, the grass is beautiful. bo CL2A AND 14 QUANT. CONC. used with the stem si, as in bana bosi, the children alone or only the children. Some speakers prefer bana ba le bosi, the children alone or only the children. bo cx2a. prer., high toned, signifies plural as in bomalomê, my uncles, i.e. more than one uncle of mine, or one or more uncles of mine and their one or more companions. Ns. ALL THE OTHER CONCORDS OF CL.2A are identical.
bo cL.14 - 2ND, Pos. bo-, in dialect variation with Jo. 1ST SYL. OF THE F. DEM. 1ST POS. 3RD POS. 4TH POS.,; bojang bo or bojang jo, this grass; bojang bono or bojang jono, this grass here nearer to me; bojang boo or joo, that grass nearer to you; bojang bole or jole, that grass over there.
bo CL.14 - -fe, -pê -ngwe.; bojang bo sele, some other or different grass; bojang bofe, which grass; bojang bopê, certain or any grass; bojang bongwe, some grass or a certain grass. NOTE THE const. bofe le bofe and bongwe le bongwe, to mean any or all regardless of type. bo cv.14 prer. low toned, signifies abstract qualities; botlhale, wisdom, etc. or foreign origin; bolêkê, billy can etc., or primitive forms, i.e. words that are cognates such as bojalwa, beer, etc. bo CL.14 QUANT. CONC. bo-, or jo-, FORTHE STEM -Si.
bo CL.14 - (SHORT FORM), bojang bo tlhaba.
bana, grass pricks children - THE sUBJ. can be understood and represented by the supu. conc.,as in bo tlhaba thata, it pricks a lot. CONJ. SIGNIFIES AS IF. fa e ka bo e le nna or bo e le nna, if it were me; other significances are if, whether, seeing that, now that.
bo - an exclamation usually found in the phrase abo to express surprise, sadness, sorrow, despair and wonderment; a bo ale setswerere, how skilful he is; a bo go latlhêga bôênê, it is they who are doomed; a bo e ka ka ya na, oh that it would rain!; motho ke eng fa e bo ne ne o mo lekola, what is the man to you that you should visit him?.
bo - part of a MULTI V. PRED., comes closest in significance to ENGL. v. "to be"; ba a bo ba rêka, they are buying (again); ba a bo ba rêka, they are buying (then); ba a bo ba rêka, then, they would be buying; ka bo ke rêka, I (at that point) bought; ke tlaa bo ke rêka, I shall be (in the process of) buying; ba tlaa bo ba remile, they will (by then) have chopped; e tshwanetse ya bo e fula, it ought to be grazing; re ka bo re rêka, we would, or should, or ought to be buying; ke tlile ka go bo o mpiditse, I came because you summoned me; oa bo o aka, you are (probably) lying; o a nthumola bo o ka ntshia, you provoke me as if you could get away from me.
bo a - CL.14 (LONG FORM) bojang bo a.
boa - animal hair.
boa - return; come back.
boa boa - return to a place time and again; frequent a place.
boa boêla - keep returning to a place, for a reason.
boadiadi - NopL.,an expanse of land e.g. a landscape.
boago - dwelling place; habitat; home; building.
boaka - adultery; fornication; lasciviousness; debauchery.
boalafiê - (same as "boalasê"), state of being healed or cured.
boammaaruri - truth.
boamogêlê - lounge.
boapu - gluttony; baseness.
boatla - carelessness; umsiness; failure or error in work.
boatlhamê - breadth; width.
bêba - (ARCH, eat fast; gulp down food.
boba - hide behind something; crouch; lurk; take a nap.
bobaba - wickedness; enmity; hostility.
bobabenyana - abjectness.
bobaka - hide, feeling guilty.
bobapa - in parallel; side by side. bêbê inrerz., pit; indent.
bobe - in excess or too much; nastiness; vileness; unpleasantness; undesirableness; ugliness.
bêbê - p., being dented.
bobêbê - skill; expertness; rapidity; facility.
bobedi - a couple.
bobeditse - has dented, etc.
bobeditswe - has been dented etc.
bobêêladithoto - hold; the space in a ship below the deck in which cargo is carried.
bêbêla - ê, sinking ground.
bobêla - hide behind something.
bêbêla - pit; pimple; be dented.
bobêlêtê - wantonness; licentiousness; unchaste; capricious; irresponsible.
bobelo - No. PL.,magnanimity; generosity.
bobelo-e-thata coMPL - NO NUMBER hard-heartedness; unkindness; cruelty; sadism.
bobelo-kgale compt - NO NUMBER bravery; fearlessness.
bobelo-kima_ compPL - NO NUMBER generosity; magnanimity; kind-heartedness.
bobelo-tshêtla, compL - NO NUMBER greediness; stinginess; selfishness.
bobelontlê - heart and ntlê, good; generosity; kind-heartedness.
bobelophêpa - state of being pure of heart; purity of heart.
bobelotona - heart and tona, big; big-heartedness; may also mean hard-heartedness; great generosity; magnanimity.
bêbêlwa - êbêla, being dented, or depressed.
bobêlwa - êla, being hidden behind something.
bobenyana - ugliness; nastiness; wretchedness; misery.
bobê6 - sinc.or mabêd, a place for depositing things.
bobesetso - a baking place; a kiln, or oven, a place where roasting is done.
bobeto - fretfulness in a child; sulkiness; crossness; peevishness.
bobetsa - dent; impress, as with a finger; press; cause to dent.
bobetsêga - be indented; become impressed; be dimpled.
bobetsegile - has been dented; impressed, or pitted.
bobi - large cakes of dry dung; a web.
bobididi - similar to boidiidi, an expanse of land, or water; a large plot of land; anything very large and extensive; impenetrable; emptiness; much hollowness; confusion.
bobipê - a place where things are hidden; a place of darkness.
boboa - [COLL. SING], THE particularises: fur; wool; hair. np. hair ona person's head is called moriri; it is hair on other parts of the body that is called maboa. Animal hair is called boboa.
boboana - feeling of nausea.
bobodu - (same as "botshwakga"), extreme or excessive laziness.
bobogêlê - theatre.
boboi - fearfulness; timidity; cowardice; blunt, as a tool.
bobôk6 - brain. THE signifies being brainy; intelligent; gifted.
bobokwe - progress; advancement.
bobola - (same as "lwala"), be sick.
bobololê - livestock going out to pasture.
bobolokêl6 - a storehouse; garner; any place for storing things; polokêlê is in common use.
bêbêra - talk in a low thick voice; growl, as a dog; roar, as a bull; murmur angrily.
bêbêraka - go on and on talking in a low thick voice; growling and roaring.
boborana - dread; fear; be drawn up, as the arms and shoulders of a very cold or frightened person.
boboranya - terrify; cause to fear.
boboranye - has drawn up one's body through fear, or cold.
boborêga - be murmuring, or growling.
boborêla - or over.
boborile - has murmured; has growled.
boboro - growl; roar.
bobêtlana - fewness; smallness; in a small measure, or degree; poor; deprived.
bobotsê - was ill, was sick.
boboya - (same as "boboa"), fur, wool, etc.
bobududu - dark grey with a blueish tint; blueness.
bobuêl6 - a place for flaying; a surgical or operating theatre; an oracle.
bobuêlôê - pDER.F. bua, an area Set aside for holding political rallies; freedom square.
bodiba - a stretch of water; an open space of water, may be surrounded by reeds; a pool in a river bed.
bodiki - [arcn, deliberation; slowness of speech or action.
bodikologê - slow; deliberate; used of a person.
bodikologôê - a rcuit.
bodila - teeth set on edge by eating something sour; sourness; thick sour milk, same as madila.
bodile - [arcu], a small short-horned rhinoceros.
bodile - has rotted; has gone bad; has become rotten.
bodilê - wall or floor that has been plastered.
bodimo - (same as "bo dingwe"), ogres; giants; evil ones; dimo and company.
bodingwe - associates of dingwe, or dimo, the evil one; cannibals.
bodipa - headstrongness; masterfulness; impudence; defiance; stubborn pride.
bodiri - labour.
bodirê - a working, or doing.
bodisa - make something rot.
bodisaka - cause to rot extensively, or decay easily.
bodisana - «Ec. < bêla, cause each other to rot, as fruits in a container.
bodisane - have made each other rotten.
bodišaše - (same as "boesemang"),; nonentities; cowards; nondescripts.
bodisêtlhane - small hares.
bodisetsa - allow to rot.
bodisisa - 1nr. < bola, to make very rotten.
bodisitse - has caused to decompose or rot.
bodisitswe - has been made to rot.
bodisiwa - (same as "bodiswa being made to rot").
bodišwane - large white vultures.
boditse - strands of hair as in horse's tail and mane; long hair of an animal.
boditse - (same as "bodisitse which is more commonly used"),; has made to rot; has caused to decompose.
boditse - has asked, inquired, or questioned.
boditswe - has been asked, or questioned.
bodiwa - (same as "botswa"),; being asked; being questioned.
bodubêlo - kneading trough; any vessel for kneading in.
bodujê - a kneading place for dough etc.
bodulê - a sitting place; sitting room.
boduma - a troop of wildebeeste.
boduma - similar to kôkôrêpana; shrivel.
bodumile - has shrivelled.
bodumisitse - has caused to shrivel.
bodumisitswe - has been caused to shrivel.
bodumisiwa - being made to shrivel.
bodupa - a smell, usually unpleasant; a bad scent or taste; a stench.
bodupa - impudence.
bodutu - loneliness; solitude.
boe - ovum. boebu Ncx.14 bo-, shades of grey; grey effect made by speckle of black and white. boêla_v.s. appL., return for; return on account of; go back for.
boêlana - re-establish friendship; reestablish diplomatic relations.
boêlanye - has re-established friendship; has re-established diplomatic relations.
boeledisitse - has caused to be repeated.
boeledisitswe - has been repeated.
boeleditse - has repeated.
boeleditswe - has been repeated; has been made to repeat, revise, or go over.
boelediwa - (same as "boeletswa"), being repeated; being made to repeat, revise, or go over.
boeleele - folly; foolishness.
boêlêla - repeat; go over; revise.
boeletsa - make to repeat, revise, or go over.
-boeletse - has gone over; has repeated.
boeletswa - (same as "boelediwa"), being made to repeat, revise, or go over.
boeletswe - has been gone over; has been revised; has been repeated.
boêmêlôê - station.
boêmê - sinc.or maêmd, standing place; standing room; standing in place of; instead of; on behalf of.
boenjeniêrê - bo-, engineering [borrowed].
boesemang - unimportant people; nondescripts.
boetlaetlana - preciousness; loveliness.
boetse - has returned to.
boetswe - has benefited; has profited.
bofa - bind; tie round.
bofa bofa - bind together a few things at a time.
bofafalele - wastefulness; extreme carelessness; extravagance.
bofagana - be tied together in a bundle; be intertwined.
bofaganya - tie together.
bofaka - do a lot of binding; bind many things.
bofana - bind together; cling together.
bofape - (same as "bopape"), a flat squashed nose.
bofatlha - selfishness; presumptuousness; self-centredness.
bofatshwa - being black and white in bold, distinct marking, with black head.
bofatswa - (same as "bofatshwa").
bofe - which one (mainly InreR.).
bofefo - lightness; not heavy; quick; easy; swift.
bofêga - become bound; be tied.
bofêla - tie on behalf of.
bofêlêla - tie up; be apprenticed to practise, as a witchdoctor.
bofêlêlêla - tie on.
bofêlêlê - the ending; the finishing point.
bofêlêlwa - being tied on to; being bound to something.
bofêlêpa - No sING., deceit; cunning.
bofelêpê - (same as "bofêlêpa").
bofeletse - êlêla, has tied to; has bound on.
bofeletswe - has been tied on to, for the purpose of.
bofêlê - end; last; termination; finish.
bofêlwa - being tied; being bound.:.
bofêpê - folly; witchcraft; cursing.
boferefere - No siNG.,craftiness deceitfulness; slyness.
bofetse - has tied for, has bound for.
bofêtshwana - vim. oF bofêfê moderate speed.
bofetso - the last; the completion; the finishing.
bofetswe - has been tied for.
bofibidu jo bo letlholôl6 - scarlet.
bofibidu jo bo mokgana - purple.
bofifadu - streak of white, as found on the forehead of a dark animal.
bofije - a woman's sister in law, the wife of a woman's brother.
bofitlha - obscurity.
bofitlhanyana - pim.or bofitlha, some obscurity; a bit of obscurity.
bofofu - blindness; loss of sight. Expr.go latlhela bofofu.
bofologê - a descent; staircase.
bofolola - untie; unbind.
bofololwa - being untied; being unbound.
bofolotsê - has untied.
bofolotswê - has been untied.
bofube - red feathered birds with black heads; notorious red grain-eating finches.
bofubidu - redness.
bofudis6 - (same as "bofuld"), a grazing ground; pasture.
bofula - greed; stinginess.
bofulôê - (same as "bofudisê"), grazing ground; grazing.
bofutsana - siING.oF mafutsana, same as bohutsana, be very sad.
bofwa - (same as "bofiwa and boswa"), being bound; being tied.
boga - suffer; endure; bear pain.
bogadi - lobdla, cattle given to a woman's elders as a marriage gift; dowry.
bogadingwana - the state of being an inferior or junior wife.
bogagapa - extortion.
bogagaru - grasping; extortion; greed.
bogais6 - excellence; preeminence; superiority.
bogajane - vim. oF bogale, little anger.
bogaka - suffer greatly; endure much | pain; bear great anguish.
bogakgale - audacity; impertinence; wickedness.
bogalaka - extreme bitterness.
bogale - anger; sharpness; intensity of purpose; the edge of a blade or knife, spear etc.
bogamê - the milking side of a cow, as in phekelo la bogamê.
bogane - sinc.or magare, the middle; the midst; the centre.
boganka - bravery; valour; fierceness in battle.
bogareganaga - + naga the wilderness; the open veld; in the veld.
bogatlapa - cowardliness; cowardice; timidity.
bogatê - space to walk.
bogatsu - pins and needles; same as bonyêlêlê, cramp; numbness; a tingling sensation in a cramped limb.
bogaufi - nearness; proximity.
bogautshwane - pim. or bogaufi nearness; proximity.
bogêla - watch; gaze at.
bogelegele - similar to lekgela, not quite ripe, ose to ripening, as in fruit.
bogisa - oppress; persecute; cause to suffer.
bogiseditse - suffered much for; has persecuted for; has oppressed for.
bogiseditswe - has been made to suffer for.
bogisêga - be made to suffer; become oppressed, or persecuted.
bogisetsa - oppress for; persecute for; cause to suffer for.
bogisitse - has persecuted; has oppressed.
bogisitswe - has been persecuted, or oppressed.
bogoba - a secret departure.
bogdbê - porridge; bread; maize.
bogôbê - (same as "digdbd"), bow-legged.
bogodimo - height; loftiness.
bogodisa - cause to bark.
bogodisitse - has caused to bark.
bogodisitswe - has been made to bark.
bogodisiwa - being caused to bark.
bogodu - theft.
bogêgê - crust on the side or bottom of a utensil in which food has been cooked.
bogêgêtl6 - fanaticism; extreme earnestness.
bogoka - lust.
bogokane - bad manner (used of dogs) of promiscuous mating.
bogokgo - principalship; headmastership.
bogoko - dregs of fat, after it has been melted down.
bogola - as a dog.
bogolaka - bark a lot; bark for a long time.
bogolana - as dogs.
bogolê - far; distant.
bogôlê - lameness; deformity; blemish; to be maimed; crippled.
bogolêla - bark on account of; bark for.
bogolêlwa - being barked at for.
bogolo - greatness; age; position of importance.
bogologolo - a long time ago.
bogologolo tala apv - PHR, a long time ago; in the past.
bogologotswana - pim. oF bogologolo some time ago; a while ago; not so very long ago.
bogolwa - being barked at.
bogolwane - vim. oF bogolo, high standing of an elder; one in a good position in a community; position of seniority.
bogoma - stick grass.
bogêma - arrogance; overbearingness.
bogomana - pim.or bogêma contention.
bogonoko - an animal maimed through loss of a limb; an animal without a tail; appearance; state of being naked.
bogopa - a burr; a seed case or flower head which sticks in the othes; a medicinal plant.
bogêrêôgêl6 - a harbour; a port.
bogêrôêg6 - an arrival; time of arrival.
bogorogê - onfusion.
bogêsana - pim.or bogosi, a small kingdom; sub-leadership of a community.
bogosi - a kingdom; a government; chieftainship. prov. bogosi ga bo tlolwe, e se letsoku.
bogošo - bracelets.
bogoto - unripe fruit; fruit in the first stage of ripening.
bogotsê - has barked.
bogotswê - has been barked at.
bogwa - (same as "bogiwa"), being suffered; being endured; being persecuted.
bogwadi - perverseness; obstinacy; stubbornness.
bogwagadi - (same as "bogdgadi"), of the parents-in-law; place where the parents-inlaw of the man live.
bogwanta - impudence; defiance.
bogwata - roughness; unevenness; a pimply rash; coarseness; eruption.
bogwê - the home of the parents of a man's wife, or of the in-law's parents.
boheitane - heathenism.
bohuku - a transept; a side room [borrowed].
bohula - greed; stinginess.
bohutsana - siING.oF mahutsana, same as bofutsana, be very sad; sadness; great grief.
boi - (same as "boboi"), timid; cowardly; fearful. prov. gaabo boi ga go lelwe.
boifisitse - has made afraid; has frightened.
boifisitswe - has made afraid; has been frightened.
boifiwa - being afraid of; being feared.
boijane - young locusts.
boikanngôê - (same as "boikanyêgê trustworthiness"),; faithfulness.
boikanyologê - mistrust; distrust; a cessation of trust.
boikemisetso - policy.
boiketleetso - an action of self-preparation.
boikuêlê - an appeal; a request for aid, or help; a supplication.
boimakete - heavyweight.
boinêêl6 - calm resignation; state of being reconciled to.
boiphemêlê - maiphemêld defence.
boipusê - self-government; independence.
boirokwane - young billy goats.
boithaop6 - giving oneself up.
boitimokany6 - hypocrisy; dissembling; self deception.
boitlekeetso - self indulgence.
boitlhômê - < itlhêdma, establish, act of establishing oneself.
boitsetsepêl6 - firm stand.
boitshêgisa - make dreadful or terrible.
boitsokeletso - curve; a hiding place.
bojosi - loneliness; solitariness; a state of being alone.
bojotihe - entirely; use of land.
bokadikadi - t.14 bo-, same as bophadiphadi pools of water, as on a plain after much rain.
bokaladitswe - has been caused to droop through sleeplessness, as the eyes.
bokamos6 - future.
bokamuru - mental defectiveness.
bêkana - praise each other; compliment one another.
bokete - weight; pregnancy.
bokgabale - dexterity; skill.
bokgaga - PROBABLY armadillo with its spikes, or armour; arrogance.
bokgwabê - mild; tame; harmless.
bokhukhwane - < bo-, same as mosukujwane, fever tree; wild tea; verbena.
bokisisa - to praise; flatter excessively.
bokoledisitse - < bokoledisa has caused to cry out in pain.
bokoledisitswe - caused to cry out in pain.
bokolobê - like a pig; slovenly behaviour.
bokolobê - (same as "dikolobê"), pigs, both wild and domestic; swine.
bokolotsa - praise highly; pay excessive compliments.
bokomanisi - communism [borrowed].
bokotlase - makotlase inferior.
bokukuntshwane - stealth; secrecy.
bokwena - sternum.
bêla - < rot; putrefy.
bolaanwa - being killed by each other; being hurt by each other.
bolaantsê - have hurt each other.
bolausu - blouse [borrowed].
bolêbêlêbê - such and such; applies as PL, particular places not mentioned by name.
boleletse - has informed; has told.
boleletswe - has been told; has been informed.
boletsa - ask, enquire, or f question for the purpose of.
boletse - has told; has stated; has announced; has proclaimed.
boletswa - a vegetable parasite with red fruits when ripe; bird lime; when green it is very sticky.
bolo - same as futubêld, kgwele, a ball [borrowed].
boloditse - has let out, as livestock from the kraal, or initiates of an initiation rite.
boloditswe - have been let out, as livestock from the kraal, or initiates of an initiation rite.
boloka - splinter in flesh.
bolokegile - has been saved or spared.
bolokesegile - has been saved; be saved.
bolôk6 - the newly deposited dung of cattle; it has many household uses, chief of which is to mix it with soil to give it the desired consistency for use as a building material.
bolopênê - e., dibolopêne, ballpoint pen [borrowed].
bolotloa - basketball netball.
boloto - ability; everness; ingenuity.
bolêtsana - dishonesty; unprincipledness; roguishness.
bolotsê - has gone off, as livestock from the kraal.
bolotwê - NoNum.,same as boloto ability; pride, etc.
bolumo - volume [borrowed].
bolwetsana - childhood illness; diarrhoea plus vomiting.
bolwetsi - sinc.or malwetsi, a disease; a wasting sickness; an illness.
bomatsêtsêlêkê - dexterity; skilfulness.
bomo - wilfulness; presumptuousness; without care. 1p. Expr. ka bomo o senya dild.
bomonnawê - his/her younger brothers; his/her younger sisters; his or her younger siblings. n.B. Setswana is not preoccupied with distinguishing between the sexes.
bomumu - dumbness.
bêna bêna - look around; look at, as a way of whiling away time.
bênaditswe - has been made visible.
bonakôê - quickness; rapidity.
boênalêsêga - become exposed.
bonalesegile - has become exposed.
bonana - tenderness; youthfulness; state of being young.
bênana - see each other; meet each other.
bonatla - might; power; vigour; everness, or prowess.
bênatsiwa - (same as "bênatswa being manifested"),; being made visible.
bone - has looked; has seen; has experienced.
bênêga - be enlightened; to illuminate; to X-ray.
bonegile - ênêga, has been lit; is lit; is X-rayed.
bonegilwe - ênêga, being lit; being Xrayed.
bênêlanwa - ênêlana, seeing one another's private parts.
bonesa - illuminate; X-ray.
bênêtê - dibênêtê bonnet [borrowed].
bonetetshi - similar to bonokopila science.
bongadingadi - wrangling; bad temper; peevishness.
bongaka - treatment; doctoring.
bongwale - < bo-, virgins; girls ready for the initiation ceremony; the great ones, dinatla tsa dinatla.
bonndêtlhagê - habitat; natural home.
bonota - gum from wild fig tree.
bonthorongwane - weaklings; skinny people.
bonthufe - field rats. bontlhanngwe ab. partly.
bêntsha - cause to see; show; make visible.
bontshitse - has shown; has made visible.
bontshitswe - has been shown.
bontshiwa - (same as "bêntshwa"), being shown; being demonstrated to.
bontšhe - (same as "bomantshe"), ostriches. prov. bontshe ga ba ke ba tlhakanêla khutla.
bonwa - being experienced.
bonya - blink; slow.
bonyelenyele - (same as "bonyelele and segatsetsa"), rheumatism; numbness.
bonywe - has been seen; has been found. boo v.avux.,a contraction of babo, as in boo ba dira, then they do, signifies time aspect.
bodkêl6 - hospital.
booki - nursing profession.
boomo - (same as "bomo"), wilfulness; presumptuousness; purposely; without cause.
bopaganyeditse - has been moulded into a ball for.
bopaganyeditswe - has been moulded into a ball for.
bopaganyediwa - (same as "bopaganyetswa"), being moulded into a ball for.
bopaganyegile - has been moulded into a ball.
bopalamêlê - transport terminus.
bêpalanye - have challenged one another.
bopapata - (same as "bopapetla and bophatladika"), flatness.
bopegile - has become shaped formed, or fashioned.
bêpeletse - has walked in single file, as cattle; has gone in procession.
bopelo-e-thata - heart and thata, hard; hard-heartedness; unkindness.
bopelo-kima compPt - NONUM generosity; magnanimity, kind-heartedness.
bopelo-mpe comPL - No Num, Similar to bobelo-e-thata, evil; cruelty.
bopelokgalê compt - NO NUM., bravery; fearlessness.
bopelompe compL - NoNUuM., Similar to bobelo-e-thata, evil; cruelty.
bopelonomi - heart and nomi, kind; kindness.
bopêrê - horse or donkey dung.
bophadiphadi - large stretches or pools of water.
bophaphathi - wideness; broadness.
bophara - breadth; width.
bophatladika - (same as "bopapetla and bopapata"), flatness.
bophatsim6 - brilliance; lustre.
bopisa - cause or help to create; form fashion, build, or mould.
bopisitse - has helped to mould; has helped to create.
bopisitswe - has been created, formed, fashioned, built or moulded.
bopologa - be disfigured; become disfigured; lose former shape.
bopologêla - be disfigured.
bopologetse - has become disfigured, etc.
bopologile - has become disfigured.
bopologilwe - has been disfigured.
bopolola - change the shape of.
bopololêla - disfigure; change shape.
bopolotse - has disfigured; has reshaped, or redesigned a thing.
boêra - bore; drill.
boragane - sp.small birds, probably quelea, that move in flocks and are destructive to crops.
borakabese - same as sefitlhold breakfast [borrowed].
borakapetlo - testis.
boraki - |For}, small dog.
boralešane - brown wasps, with a very poisonous sting.
boranabene - (same as "boranti diboranabene"), brandy [borrowed].
borankana - traditional dancing, in which there is much showing off; traditional dances in which young men/women show off their expertise to other young men/women and vice versa.
boranti - diboranti, brandy [borrowed].
borathane - malnutrition.
bore - a young rabbit, or a leveret.
borebotlhole - poison; snake poison.
borêka - make holes in wood, etc.
borêkêlêgadi - marêkêlêgadi supermarket.
borêkêrêkê - bosame as boêpêrêpê or borêpurêpu, marêkêrêkê, mucus; jelly-like substance.
boreku - gum.
borepurepu - (same as "borêkêrêkê or borêpêrêpê"), shaky, as jelly; jelly-like.
borêrêrêrê - [arcu], jellified, as cold gravy.
borêthê - the heel part; the heel of an animal.
borika - brake; same as gata maremo.
borikatiri - (For brigadier.
boriki - marêmê, brake [borrowed].
borikiphaphatshana - disc brake.
borikitlhwê - < bo-, blunt knives, axes, etc.
borikitlhwe - blunt cutting intrument or edge.
boriwa - [ror], being bored; being drilled.
bêr6 - a drill; a tool for making holes [borrowed].
boroba - virginity; state of being marriageable; adolescence; puberty (female).
borêbal6 - a bedroom, a place of sleep; hostel; dormitory; accommodation.
bêrêbôr6 - a murmur of voices.
borokgwe - trousers; pants; shorts [borrowed].
borolala - be in a helpless state.
borênse - bronze [borrowed].
bêrês6 - boerewors; sausage [borrowed].
borêthêpatê - sandwich.
borothwe - < bo-, same as borotho, vegetable similar to spinach. sp. eome gynandra.
bêrêt6 - boards; trays [borrowed].
borra - fathers (vocative).
borukutlhi - conspiracy; insurrection; rebellion.
borurugd - (same as "thurugê"), a swelling.
borutloolê - marutloolê obesity.
bosa - the earing of darkness, night, ouds or rain.
bošabôê - sinc.or mosabê, relish.
bosae - lice found in chickens.
bošakgal6 - NO NUMBER [archaic], wrath; fierce indignation.
bosampokane - carriers of night soil; sewage collectors.
bosasa - dawn.
bose - testis. bosele v.pur,it is time to wake or get up.
bosetamajwe - sculpture.
bosê - imbecility.
bêšwa - (same as "boswabotshwere N"),.CL.14 bo-, an exclusive and close friendship.
boswagadi - rituals and rites to do with the death of a wife.
boswata - (same as "bogwata"), a rash; pimples; eruption.
bosweno - testes; male genitals.
boswetso apst - completion; a finishing.
botaki - painting. botala (jwa tlhaga) N.green.
botennyeng - the inner depth; mystery.
boteti - the name of a river that flows into Lake Xhau, the land around the Boteti River.
bothakga - (same as "bonatla and botswerere"), neatness; skilfulness; everness; excellence.
bothama - be naked; lack the covering required by decency.
bothani - botany [borrowed].
bothekiniki - technical [borrowed].
bothile - has reposed; has rested.
bothilwe - has been restored or rested.
bothisetsa - to rest for.
bothisitswe - has been made to rest.
bothithê - heat; warmth.
bêthotho - foolishness.
bothuntshetso - rifle range.
bothuth6 - (same as "bothithd"), heat; warmth.
botitamare - the flesh on bulls' necks.
botlalogolo - matlalogolo maximum.
botlapa - laziness.
botlasetlase - very low place.
botlhaswa - arelessness.
botlhaswa - disorderly.
botlhatlhêlê - a place for keeping livestock.
botlhatshe - DIAL. vAR. OF botlase which is more commonly used; the bottom.
botlhatshetlhatshe - [arcu], the lowest point.
botlhatswetsadijana - scullery; kitchen.
botlhofo - light (weight).
botlhêgôputswa - very old men; grey-haired men.
botlhêka - to lack; a state of not having.
botlhoko - pain; illness; bitterness; spiritual pain.
botlhêphêlê - polling station.
botl6 - [ARCcH,a coming, seldom used; the infinitive go tla is more commonly used.
botlwaêlê - a becoming accustomed; the acquiring of a habit.
botôbê - as wet othes; soft, as overripe fruit.
botôbêtêbê - very soft, as overripe fruit; comfortable, as a cushion.
botêbôk6 - very wet; soaking wet.
botoka - betterness; improving.
bêtêlêga - stand menacingly; stand in readiness to fight.
bêtêlêganya - be very aggressive; behave challengingly towards another; be very arrogant.
botona - largeness; bigness; used to mean masculinity by the Barolong and Tlhaping.
botonanyana - masculinity; testes; male genital organs.
botonna - largeness (western Setswana, Setlhaping).
bêtôrôê - butter [borrowed].
botsa - ask; enquire; question; find out.
botsa botsa - make inquiries endlessly; ask many questions.
botsaka - ask a lot; question closely; make a thorough investigation.
botsakwa - (same as "bodiwaka being asked many questions"),; being questioned very closely.
botsala - per.r. tsala, friendship; a friend.
botsalanê - mutual friendship; being friends.
botsalêlê - birthplace.
botsalê - birth.
botsalwapele - give birth and pele, first; primogeniture; first born and therefore having certain rights, privileges, duties and obligations.
botsana - ask each other; find out from one another, etc.
botsanya - enquire from one another; ask each other.
botsanye - have asked one another.
botšarara - (same as "botlha"), sourness; acidic in taste.
botsatsa - delicate.
botseketseke - flabbiness; softness; puffiness.
botsên6 - (same as "botsênw6"), entrance.
botsên6 - (same as "botsenwa"), madness; insanity.
botsetse - confinement.
botsêtsêtsêlêk6 - dexterity; skill in handwork, etc.
botshabêl6 - a refuge.
botshe - of sugar, etc,; honey; syrup.
botsheka - (same as "bokone"), the north.
botshêlapeterôl6 - petrol station.
botshelê - sinc.or matsheld, life.
botshogwi - (same as "marwêrvê"), night hawks.
botshosabanne - [D.], same as maphurulwane; masogo; bokwagale, a species of partridge.
botshubêlê6 - a place for burning things; an incinerator.
botshwakga - laziness; slowness; said also of a baby that should already be crawling, or walking.
botshwarê - bondage; slavery; handle, of an instrument, or tool.
botsididi - coldness; very low temperature.
botsipa - skill.
botsisa - help to ask questions.
botsisanya - question each other; reason with someone about something.
bots6 - exit; place of exit the beginnings; the origins of something.
botsodutsokwane - or goldcoloured ointment used to smear on women's faces.
botsofe - old age; senility.
botsog6 - health; state of being well.
botsokwane - < bo-, francolin; partridge; type that is found in stony areas.
botsotsi - gangstership.
botswa - (same as "bodiwa"), being questioned.
botswalêlê - (same as "lesaka"), which is commonly used; a place for shutting up cattle, etc.
botsweretshi - art.
boulêla - be disinclined; behave jealously.
bouletse - has become averse; has become disinclined.
boupi - powder, flour.
boutu - %., same as tlhêphd, vote [borrowed].
bowets6 - completion; the end.
bua - operate; talk; speak.
buaka - talk a lot, or for a long time; talk on and on.
buanye - have spoken about one another secretly, etc.
bududitse - has gleaned; has searched for the last ears of corn.
bududitswe - has been gleaned.
buduladitse - has shut the eyes of.
buduladitswe - has been shut, as eyes.
buduletse - blown up with the breath; filled a sail; inflated something; to be shut, as eyes.
buduloga - to swell, as a tyre; to rise, as dough; to open eyes; to grow out of babyish ways; to stare at life.
budulogile - has been bloated, swollen or puffed up.
budulola - used of the eyes and mind.
budulolwa - being reopened as eyes.
budulosa - cause to puff up or swell.
budulosa - cause distension.
budulosêga - become blown up, or swollen, as a balloon.
budulosêga - become puffed up; become inflated with wind.
budulosegile - is puffed up or swollen.
budulositse - has caused to puff out, or swell.
budulositswe - has been caused to puff out, or swell.
budulotsê - has opened the eyes.
budusa - cause to ripen, used of an abscess. budusa-tsela 1. Expr, go regularly to; visit often.
buduseditse - has made ripe for; has cooked for.
buduseditswe - has been made ripe for.
budusetsa - be getting ready for opening, as an abscess; used to refer to the time when the sun is about to rise.
buêga - well skinned; cut off, as joints of meat from a dead animal.
buegile - has been skinned well; has been well butchered, as joints of meat from a dead animal.
buegile - has been spoken.
buêla - rebuke; scold; speak in a certain way, as in buêla godimo, speak up, and buêla tlase, speak low; flay, or skin on someone's behalf (when followed by a locative, signifies the place where skinning is or was being done).
buêlêga - be scolded.
buêlêla - êla, speak for; speak on behalf of; advocate cause of; represent as a counsel, or advocate.
buêlêlwa - being spoken for; being represented, as by a counsel, advocate, or spokesman.
bugantsê - has ejected, spurted blood out, etc.
buganya - eject from the mouth ina stream; spurt blood out, as a severe cut; pour more than the desired quantity of water into a pot.
buile - has spoken, talked, or discussed.
builwe - has been flayed; has been skinned.
buisa - cause to speak; speak to; read; account; talk in conversation; shout to, or at; help to flay or skin an animal.
buisana - > buisa, speak to one another; discuss a matter together.
buisanya - > buisana, cause one another to speak, discuss.
buisanye - > buisana, have spoken to one another; have discussed a matter mutually.
buisetsa - talk to about; discuss.
buisetswa - > buisetsa, same as buisediwa being talked to; being discussed.
buisiwa - > buisa, being talked to; being spoken to in a certain connection.
buiwa - being spoken; being skinned, or flayed.
buka - ¢., same as lokwalo, a book.
bukakwadisê - register.
bukatshwantsh6 - album.
buki - ¢., the powder of a dry fungus used to smear on women's faces.
buku - InreERJ, of stirring, as a thing that seemed dead.
bukuntsê - > bukunya, has shown signs of life.
bukunya - give signs of life by moving; move, as a person under a kaross, or bedclothes; burrow.
bukunyêga - be stirring under something; show signs of being alive.
bukunyegile - > bukunyêga, has moved as does a worm; has wriggled.
bula bula - open indiscriminately.
bulaka - open every door possible; open wide.
buledisa - accompany part of the way; escort out of the house; take half-way.
buledisanya - > buledisana, accompany one another part of the way; escort one another out of the house.
buledisitse - > buledisa, has accompanied; has taken half-way.
buledisiwa - > buledisa, being escorted out of the house, etc.
bulêga - become opened.
bulegile - > bulêga, has been opened.
bulêla - open for; let someone come in.
bulêlwa - > bulêla, being opened for.
buletse - > bulêla, has opened for.
buna - bite.
bunnê - > buna, has bitten.
bupa - (same as "bipa"), which is commonly used; cover; hide.
bupe - (same as "boupi corn"),; meal; flour.
burure - first born.
busa - > bowa, return to; refund.
busa - rule; govern; reign over.
busabusanya - > busabusana, dispute.
busana - rule one another.
busanya - > busana, rule each other.
busanye - > busana, have ruled each other.
busetsa - give back.
busetsa - put back; return something; compensate.
busolola - take vengeance upon.
busolosa - > busa, avenge; rebut, or answer the words of a previous speaker; turn back the skin, when flaying; revenge.
busoloseditse - > busolosêtsa, has taken vengeance for; avenged.
busoloseditswe - > busoloseditse, has been avenged for.
busolosediwa - > busolosetsa, same as busolosetswa, being avenged for.
busolosetsa - avenge.
busolositse - > busolosa, has avenged.
busolositswe - > busolositse, has been avenged.
busolosiwa - > busolosa, being avenged.
butha - be lost; go round in circles as one who has lost a sense of direction.
buti - boots.
butlêga - (same as "putlêga"), breakable.
butlêgile - > butlêga, same as putlêgile, has become broken.
butsologa - > butswa, relapse.
butswa - ready, as food cooking over a fire or as fruit that is ripening.
butswa - be well cooked.
butswê - > butsê, has been opened.
butswêla - (same as "futswêla"), fan a flame; a place for shutting up cattle, etc.
