daana - Strike each other.
daantse - has dashed down.
daanya - (same as "itaanya"), dash down; strike one thing against another.
daanye - have struck each other.
daea - (same as "ntaya and itaya strike"),; hit.
danka s - [D., footsore.
dia - delay; make late.
diadia - entertain one; prevent from going for a while.
diaene - pressing irons [borrowed].
diaka - adulterers; harlots; prostitutes.
diakanyôê - reasonings.
diakôê - ears of corn, etc.
diala - muscles of the upper arm.
dialetara - di -,[arcu], altars.
dialê - bedding; skins spread to lie on as sleeping mats.
dialogane - graduates.
diana - delay each other; waste one another's time.
diane - proverbs.
diane - have delayed one another.
dian6 - venerate; tribal totems; objects of veneration.
dianwa - delaying one another.
dianwe - have been delaying one another.
dianyanese - (same as "diaie and dikwii"), onions [borrowed].
diaparê - othes; othing.
diapu - gluttons; low fellows.
diareka - arks [borrowed].
diaretapole - [Fror| potatoes.
diatla - hands.
diba - make a circle.
dibabetsane - nettles; plants of the nettle family.
dibaea - (same as "dibaya"), small bare places on the ground.
dibaga - (same as "ditalama and digafa"), beads; necklaces.
dibara - bars; places where people drink beer [borrowed].
dibasari - bursaries [borrowed].
dibata - spots; patches; spotted oth; dangerous animals; beasts of prey.
dibata - di -, bath tubs; immersion in liquid for eansing or therapy [borrowed].
dibatana - vin. dibata wild beasts with aws; beasts of prey of the cunning type, hence cunning people; carnivorous animals.
dibateresekune - gumboots [borrowed].
dibatla - treeless plains; bare places in the veld, hence open-air meetings including those of a political nature.
dibe - sins; dirt; filth, or.
dibêêla - i.e. items treated with medicines that are left at some place and meant to transfer an illness or a curse by superstitious ways from the sufferer to someone else.
dibekedi - (same as "dibêtlêla"), splinters; flying chips.
dibêkê - nose; eaners.
dibêla - similar to sireletsa, guard, or keep from harm; take care of; save from.
dibeleditse - (same as "beeleditse"), has caused liquid to be caught or trapped for domestic use.
dibêlêsêga - be taken care of.
dibelesegile - has become guarded, or kept from harm; has become trapped, or caught, as liquid.
dibeletsa - cause liquid to be caught, or trapped in a hand or vessel.
dibesetso - grills; hearths for the rain-maker; places of sacrifice.
dibes6 - (same as "dibesetsê cooking places"),; grates; gridirons; fires of a rain-maker, hence altars. NB. not fitting to refer to Christian altars as dibesê.
debete - livers; soles of the feet.
dibetebete - ground creeping plants with yellow flowers.
dibêtlêla - (same as "diphatsa and diphaphi"), pieces of wood; chips; splinters, etc.
dibetsa - pDER.F. betsa weapons.
dibets6 - scourges; rods of the lictors.
dibi - dried cow-dung.
dibikiri - (For), beakers; mugs.
dibile - made a circle.
diboba - flying insects that bite; gad-flies. prov. seboba re bata sa mokwatla, sa mpa re a mpampetsa.
dibobo - weak, or feeble; invalided. See mabobo.
dibodu - rotting objects, as carcasses; a very nasty smell.
diboko - worms; maggots.
dibôk6 - praise name; the totem name with which one is thanked, e.g. in thanking a person of the Bakwena totem you may say: ee, kwena.
dibokolodi - millipedes.
dibola - rent, or tear out; tear off flesh; cut a hole for a patch.
dibola - a mark, or patch that is distinctive; roundish patches of impure, mixed or speckled colour, especially in cattle.
dibolaê - weapons of defence.
dibolwa - being rent, or torn out.
dibênêganawa - (same as "dinakangwedi"), glow-worms; greenflies.
dibonkisi - beans; white big beans.
dibono - anus.
dibopiwa - create; created things; creatures.
diborêlê - o di-, spectacles.
dibothwana - usters.
dibotsare - swellings.
dibotsê - has cut a hole for a patch; has cut, or shaved off a patch of hair; has torn off flesh.
dibotswê - has been rent, or torn out.
dibowa - bagged and stored. NB. THAT THE DIM. FORM, dibowana, is more frequently used.
dibui - speakers; orators.
didiba - wells; pools; water pits; boreholes.
didibêl6 - jug; a container that resembles a jug.
didibê - patches; spots.
didikadike - large numbers, hence the number, millions.
didikadiki - rcular thing; things surrounded, or enclosed.
didikantswê - see dikgadika, bits of meat left after the fat has been rendered.
didikets6 - surroundings.
didile - has smeared a wall, or floor, traditionally done with earth mixed with cow dung.
didilwe - has been smeared, or plastered.
didimaditse - has silenced; has quietened; has stopped one from crying.
didimaditswe - has been silenced; has been quietened.
didimadiwa - (same as "didimatswa"), being quietened, or silenced.
didimala - be silent, or become silent; calm down, as the weather; cease, as rain.
didimalêla - be silent on account of; not to speak to another, as a sign of disapproval.
didimalêlana - state of not speaking to one another.
didimalêlanwa - < didimalêlana avoiding speaking to each other.
didimalêlanwe - having avoided speaking to each other.
didimalêlanye - have avoided speaking to one another.
didimaletse - has not spoken to.
didimaletswe - has not been spoken to.
didimalwa - silent; being calm.
didimatsa - silence; cause silence; stop a noise.
didimetsa - draw much water, or milk.
didimetse - has drawn much water, or milk.
didimetse - has become quiet or silent.
didimo - ghosts.
didimoga - draw back startled and in order to avoid something.
didiri - workers; agents.
didisa - cause or make to smear a wall or floor to a smooth finish with earth mixed with a bit of dung.
didisitse - has caused or helped to smear a wall or floor to a smooth finish with earth mixed with a bit of dung.
didisitswe - has been helped to smear a wall or floor to a smooth finish with earth mixed with a bit of dung.
didisiwa - being caused or helped to smear a wall or floor to a smooth finish with earth mixed with a bit of dung.
diduledi - sieges; surroundings of.
didulê - rarely used, same as dituld, chairs; stools.
didupe - divining bones.
diêga - be delayed.
diegile - has delayed.
diegilwe - has been delayed.
diegisa - make late, or delay.
diegisetsa - (same as "diitse cause"), or make to delay for.
diegisitse - has caused to delay.
diegisiwa - (same as "diegiswa being caused to delay").
diegiwa - (same as "diêgwa"), being delayed; being late; delaying.
diêla - delay for.
diêla - distinguishing brands or marks, particularly in livestock; sentences, same as diêlê.
dieleele - stupid people; fools.
diêl6 - measures; amounts.
diêlwa - being delayed for.
diêmêra - infirmities.
diemêrê - buckets [borrowed].
diesêlê - to di-, (FoR, asses donkeys.
diêtsêla - superior othes; the fine othes worn at a traditional feast.
difadi - including those used on pots.
difaele - folders; files [borrowed].
difafalele - reckless people; careless people; wasteful people.
difakôê - hail; hail storms.
difala - corn bins, or food storage places. pm. oF difalana, which is the form that is commonly used.
difala-matlhong compL - scrape and matlho, eyes; shameless people; rogues.
difale - bent-back horns.
difaphê - turned-out feet.
difap6 - bandages; wrappings.
difare - two ears of corn on one stalk, hence poor or inferior ears of corn.
difatana - vi. difata [archaic], trees. Bakgatla praise poetry refers to bana ba sefatana sa moruleng, an allusion to the Bakgatla of Mochudi.
difatukwi - dish oths [borrowed].
difawa - timid persons; bits of soft stick used to beat children with.
dife - CL8 di AND 10 di-,; INTER, Which, as in which things, which ones.
difef6 - winds; high winds; storms; whirlwinds.
difeie - figs [borrowed].
difeki - similar to dipheke, a male animal fit to cover a female; a stallion; a bull; a male dog, etc.
difela - hymns; holy songs.
difem6 - weapons of defence.
difêphê - people with wild behaviour; immoral people; impetuous people; unreliable people.
diferwana - little paths; back entrances which are private.
dififi - state of mourning restricting the individuals concerned from mixing socially until after a ceremonial eansing; carcasses or corpses; the remnants of a skeleton, found lying in the veld.
difikantswê - monument; tombstone; cairn.
difitlholo - breakfast.
difodi - wild ducks.
difofane - (same as "difoleimatshine"), aeroplanes; flying machines.
difofu - the blind; blind people.
difola - similar to dikaka deserts; desert places.
difokwane - bodifokwane a young billy goat.
difoleiti - di., mouth organ; flute [borrowed].
difolêtê - o di-,(ror), apartment houses; flats, for residential use.
difolotsana - non-viable foetuses; weaklings; miscarriages; abortions.
difomê - forms [borrowed].
diforaga - loads; wagon loads [borrowed].
difôrôk6 - forks [borrowed].
diforêm6 - moulds as used for moulding bricks [borrowed].
difôt6 - (For), same as senêpê or setshwantshd, photos.
difudi - ducks; wild ducks; sharp shooters; expert shots.
diga - cast down; let fall. wp. expr. diga pelo, be contented.
digaba - (same as "dirankure"), one-string violins.
digafa - (same as "ditalama and dibaga"), beads.
digaga - (same as "digaka beads").
digagabi - creeping things; crawling animals or insects; euphemistic way of referring to dangerous nocturnal reptiles.
digagapa - greedy people; extortionists.
digai - spears; assegais.
digaigai - machine guns; automatic weapons.
digaise - a dwelling that has more than one room; a dwelling that is rectangular and with more than one room [borrowed].
digajôê - engravings.
digakolodi - reminders; consciences.
digalase - glasses spectacles [borrowed].
digale - (same as "bagale sharp tools or brave persons").
diganka - valiant men; men of valour.
digankure - (same as "dirankure"), one-string violins.
digarawe - Same as difos616, spades; shovels [borrowed].
digare - Matted or knotted, as wool or hair. See mafuto.
digarenata - pomegranates [borrowed].
digareteng - curtains [borrowed].
digau - burnt and shrivelled things.
digauta - gold.
digêla - get into trouble; bring to an end, as a speech, etc.
digêlana - get each other into trouble.
digêlanye - have got each other into trouble.
digerepa - harp [borrowed].
digetse - similar to weditse, have cast down to, or for; has put into trouble; has brought to an end, as a speech; has finished.
digetswe - has been completed as a task.
digile - has cast down; has dropped.
digilwe - has been cast, or thrown down.
digisa - cause, or help to cast down or throw down.
digiwa - (same as "digwa"), being cast down etc.; being dropped.
digoba - baskets.
digobo - state of being unmilked, or not having given suck to a calf overnight; in usage must be preceded by Inr, pHR. go lala etc., as in go lala digobo, e letse digobo.
digêb6 - bow-legged.
digodi - (same as "nkgodi yellow-billed kite"),. cA AA an straight; very crooked.
digêgêrêr6 - things much twisted.
digogou - or helpless persons.
digêgwa - led animals; persons that are led; illiterate people.
digdja - people of the digdja tribe, now extinct, whose totem was a lion.
digoke - adulterers, same as diaka.
digokga - hefty and umsy people.
digokgo - spiders.
digolagola - birds of a certain species.
digom6 - lots of beads.
digootsane - (same as "segweetsane"), small grey kite.
digêp6 - large game pits; elephant trunks, same as dirêpoê.
digouta - lots of gold; a variety of golds [borrowed].
digowagowe - shout; loudspeaker; amplifier.
digwa - (same as "digiwa"), being cast down, or thrown down.
digwaba - ruthless; reckless persons.
digwagwa - (same as "digogwane or mankogwane"), frogs.
digwana - gourd; calabash.
digwapa - dried meat cut in long slices; biltong.
digwapê - creeping things of the reptilian family during the day. For example, snakes are noga, kake, etc. At night, however, they are euphemistically called dried meat cut in long slices, like biltong. Note that they are personified.
digwara - [arcuy, bad or imperfect manner of cutting.:.
digwaripana - t. din-,smallpox.; 4 [borrowed].
digwê - loops in a curtain; loops in a thong; a noose, hence a trap; go loga segwê, to plot against, or to set a trap.
digweetsane - (same as "digootsane"), small hawks.
digweletha - gnarled or knotted things.
digwere - similar to segwêtê, digwere; generally refers to either wild edible roots or to medicinal roots.
digwêtê - similar to segwere; digwêtê refers to edible roots mainly of the cultivated types such as carrots.
digwêtlha - (same as "segwêtla"), no loose hanging horns; particularly in cattle and goats.
diha - work, labour; make an effort; do.
dihahaditse - DIAL. VAR dirafaditse, has made to happen; has brought about.
dihahala - DIAL. vaR. diragala happen; occur.
dihahalêla - DIAL. VAR. diragalêla, happen to.
dihahaletse - DIAL. VAR. dirafaleletse, has happened or occurred to.
dihahatsa - DIAL. vaR. dirafatsa, cause to happen; bring about.
dihahetse - var. diragetse has happened or occurred.
dihaka - hooks; handcuffs [borrowed].
dihaka - DIAL. vAR. diraka, do much.
dihakaboi - handcuffs [borrowed].
dihakile - DIAL. var. dirakile, has done much.
dihala - grain elevator.
dihala - shotgun; ball bearings [borrowed].
dihala - DIAL. vaR. diragala happen; be done.
dihalatere - dribbles [borrowed].
dihamole - |For) hammers.
dihana - DIAL. VAR. dirana, do to one another (things).
dihanye - DIAL. vAR. diranye have done to each other.
diharaka - rakes; harrows [borrowed].
dihata - shelter made of poles for corn watchers; scaffolding. 32.
dihatsa - DIAL. VAR. diragatsa fulfil; cause to happen.
dihe Ns - s8 AND 10 ENUM. EQUAL, same as dife, mainly used to ask questions; which; which ones.:.
dihêga - (same as "dihahala"), DIAL. VAR. dirêga or diragala, happen; occur.
dihegile - pia. vaAR. diregile, has become done; has become accomplished.
dihêkê - (For), gates.
dihêla - DIAL. vAR. dirêla, do for; work for; serve.
dihêlê - hell [borrowed].
dihêmpê - shirts [borrowed].
dihesu - [D., useless people, or things; see diso.
dihetse - DIAL. VAR. diretse, has happened; have served another.
dihile - DIAL. VAR. dirile, has done; has worked.
dihêpêsê - [Frorj, beer made from hops.
dihuba - (same as "mafatlha and difuba"), chests; breasts; chestdisease, as coughing.
dihupule - hoops [borrowed].
dihutshane - (same as "difutshane"), small livestock, i.e. sheep and/or goats.
dihutshe - same as difutshe, hats [borrowed].
dihwa - DIAL. vAR F. dirwa, being done.
diidiwa - being unable to do anything.
diikeledisa - things floating on water.
diila - to be poor.
diila - be unable to do anything; be at a loss to do anything significant.
diile - has delayed something; has prevented from doing; has hindered.
diilwe - has been delayed.
diipatê - excuses; false and unacceptable explanation for failure.
diipela - food from a pot at a feast.
diipone - mirrors; reflections.
diitsa - cause to be unable to do anything.
diitsana - make each other unable to do anything.
diitse - has been unable to do anything.
diiwa - being hindered, or prevented from going, or getting to a place.
dija - s di-, things; a variety of utensils. THE is frequently used to refer to utensils.
dijabana comPL - (same as "dikgono"), elbows.
dijale - (same as "ditšale shawls"),. np. ladies were traditionally expected to wear these to gatherings and other social functions and public engagements.
dijalê - seeds sown; seedlings; plants; plantation.
dijana - crockery; vessels; drinking or eating. pim. ordija, utensils.
dijanaga - (newly coined), motor cars.
dijara - Same as dingwaga or mengwaga, years; ages [borrowed].
dijarata - yards of homes; yards of materials or oth [borrowed].
dijaratine - (same as "ditalameite"), dynamite; explosives; sticks of gelignite [borrowed].
dijase - overcoats; greatcoats [borrowed].
dijêkê - jugs; jacks as used for lifting wheels of vehicles off ground while changing or eaning; machines for lifting heavy weights. Note that the Botswana Democratic Party symbol, domkrag, means (screw) jack [borrowed].
dijêla-thokê compL - eat + thokê, aside; gluttons.
dijêlôê - crops hence, pouches in gullets of birds and fowls where food is prepared for digestion.
dijêmê - jams; jamlike preparations [borrowed].
dijesi - (FOR},Same as jeresi jerseys.
dijesê - taken orally, and upsetting functioning of internal organs.
diji - lit., eaters; animal and insect pests.
dijiminasetiki - (ror) gymnastics.
dijê - food; foods.
dijokwe - (same as "bojokwe"), yokes.
dijômpolaê comPL - gluttons.
dika - encompass; beset; hem in; surround; ba dika legodu, they hem the thief in; they surround the thief; tarry; linger; be a while at; re tlaa dika mono, we will be here for a while; come from a particular direction; ba tlaa dika ba tswa Gaborone, they will come from the direction of Gaborone.
dika - during a certain period or time; ba tlaa dika ba lemile, they will plough; next ploughing season. dika apv. Fors, looking like; similar to; dika batho, human-like; dika madiri, verb-like forms.
dikabetla - (same as "dikapetla"), or dikapetlana, or diphatlo, fragments, as of ice, broken earthenware, etc.
dikabêl6 - presents or presentations of a ceremonial or ritualistic nature.
dikabo - fly swatters.
dikabê - gifts; presentations; acts of giving; dividends.
dikadika - ); be undecided; linger about; loiter.
dikadise - (DJ, trenches; siege works.
dikaganyeditse - has encompassed, or surrounded.
dikaganyeditswe - has been encompassed, or surrounded.
dikag6 - buildings; constructions.
dikai - (same as "dikad examples"),; instances; models.
dikaka - (same as "difola waterless lands"), hence deserts; desolate places.
dikakabalê - perplexities; doubts.
dikakafal6 - obstinacies; stubbornnesses.
dikakana - tobacco pipes; little boys' private parts, said teasingly; warts.
dikakanyôê - thoughts; meditations; ideas.
dikakgêgê - suspensions; heart aches; anxieties.
dikakgêlo - comments.
dikakhu - boils.
dikaki - Same as dikhaki, khaki-coloured othes, or goods; khaki othing [borrowed].
dikala - branches of trees or of organisations; friends; a ruler's confidants. 1p.Expr. matlho a dikala, large staring eyes.
dikala - staring eyes exophthalmia.
dikalabua - pods of thorn trees.
dikalaka - lime; whitewash.
dikalafi - cures; healings; doctorings.
dikale - scale; measuring instrument; beer measure; beer mug.
dikama - ay pencil-like objects with one end pointed, made by and played with by boys at a pool of water.
dikamase - leggings; gumboots [borrowed].
dikamêla - camels [borrowed].
dikamore - Same as diphapose, rooms [borrowed].
dikampa - camps; police stations.
dikana - encircle each other, as one group by another; encompass, as one group by another.
dikane - have encircled each other, as one group by another.
dikane - cans [borrowed].
dikanêla - surround; stand around.
dikankase - oars.
dikanôê - seals; promises. 1D. Expr. go swêla dikand, to stand by one's promises regardless of the outcome.
dikanono - cannons [borrowed].
dikantêr6 - same as diofisi, offices [borrowed].
dikantse - has caused or made to surround.
dikanya - cause or make to surround.
dikanye - has encompassed or surrounded, as one group by another.
dikanyeditse - (same as "dikaganyeditse"), have encompassed or surrounded.
dikanyeditswe - (same as "dikaganyeditswe"), have been encompassed, or surrounded.
dikanyeletsa - surround with; enclose by.
dikanyêtsa - (same as "dikaganyêtsa"), surround; encircle, as game; encompass.
dikaê - (same as "dikai"), examples; models; instances.
dikapaditshwantsh6 - cameras.
dikapari - dress; fashions.
dikara - Share, of a plough [borrowed].
dikarabê - araba answers; replies.
dikaramo - (For}, hoops that join yokes and chains; links.
dikarata - cards [borrowed].
dikaro - (same as "dikutu").
dikasetorone - saucepans [borrowed].
dikatakasima - catechisms [borrowed].
dikatana - vim. dikata rags; worn-out othes; tattered garments.
dikatara - guitars; musical instruments [borrowed].
dikatlele - [ror), beds same as malao.
dikatlhol6 - sentences and verdicts; decisions; judgments.
dikatl6 - kisses; caresses.
dikatse - same as bongwanamake, cats [borrowed].
dikats6 - alms; tips, for service given or expected.
dikausu - stockings; socks [borrowed].
dikêbêkwa - robbers; criminals.
dikêga - be surrounded; become surrounded.
dikêkana - (same as "dingathana"), platters; pieces of a broken pot; broken earthenware.
dikêla - (same as "kêtlômêla and kêlêmêla surround for"),; encompass for; set, as the sun in the west; disappear from view.
dikeledi - tears. prov.go lela dikeledi tsa mathe.
dikeleditse - has surrounded.
dikeleditswe - has been surrounded; is surrounded.
dikelediwa - being surrounded.
dikelerôê - (same as "mataese or ditaese"), dice. The latter is in regular use.
dikeletsa - surround a thing; thekeletsa is frequently used; make a frieze; border.
dikeletswa - (same as "dikelediwa"), being surrounded.
dikêlwa - being surrounded, or hemmed in for.
dikeng - stranger; a recent arrival.
dikêpê - ships.
dikepu - picks; sharpened metal or wooden instruments used when digging.
dikêtapele - go and pele, forward; guides or leaders; first in order; introductory remarks.
diketla - fragments; slices, as of pumpkin or watermelon.
dikêtôê - small stones used.when playing counting games; games played using small stones; puerile or petty behaviour.
dikga - parched places, as during a drought or in the dry season.
dikgaba - ornaments same as mekgabisa, fears; curses, believed to be cast on a person by a displeased relation; go tshêla dikgaba or go tsenya dikgaba, to curse.
dikgaba - wooden spoons.
dikgabala - commonly known as magabala, oval-shaped, knobbly, edible fruit, green with white stripes, yellowish when ripe, found on a creeper.
dikgabisê - (same as "mekgabisê"), adornment; decorations.
dikgabo - monkeys; flames. Kgabo (monkey) is the totem of the Bakgatla.
dikgadika - bits of meat left after the fat has been rendered.
dikgadima - lightning.
dikgafêla - No SING., remnants of corn at the bottom of sack or bin; tribute, in the form of corn given to a ruler of a community for the entertainment of strangers; a form of thanksgiving in which the first fruits of corn are given to the ruler in his position as priest representative of God, same as naka, even though the ceremonies differ; some Christian denominations have borrowed and adopted the practice as it is similar to the biblical title.
dikgaga - caves; dens in rocks.
dikgaga - pangolin; scaly ant-eater, found in southern Africa.
dikgagakgaga - NO caves; dens in caves.
dikgago - (same as "magago"), ruts; shreds; small gullies.
dikgaka - guinea fowls. 1D. EXPR. go ipala mabala a kgaka.
dikgakabalê - parched places; dried-up streams.
dikgaketla - (same as "kabetla"), sheets of ice; shards of crockery.
dikgakgala - to din-, same as dinkôênkê and dinkênkwane, dry mucus; dried-up food; food crusts.
dikgakgamats6 - wonders.
dikgakgana - small tortoises.
dikgakololê - advice; counsel; reminders.
dikgakologêlê - kgakologêlê recollections; remembrances.
dikgakolog6 - NOSING., thaw; spring-time; season of spring.
dikgala - lots of corn measured in stamping blocks.
dikgala - distances measured in a particular way.
dikgala - (same as "merodi"), dirty marks or patches on the body.
dikgaladua - large black and yellow beetles; blister beetles.
dikgalafisê - (same as "dikgalefis6"), vrr.F. galefa (p., provocations.
dikgalakis6 - ), provocations; be made to ignite or burn. |.
dikgalalapê - things as houses, trees, etc. appearing on the opposite side of a river; openings or glades | in the forest.
dikgalaopa - (same as "| magalaopa"), arid regions. |.
dikgama - hartebeest.
dikgamêlê - buckets.
dikgamu - groups.
dikgang - news; strife; disputes. |.
dikgangwe - small animals of the meerkat family.
dikgano - (same as "bokgano"), animals of the meercat family, red and very fierce.
dikganyana - roots similar to carrots.
dikgapa - shells.
dikgapetla - eggshells.
dikgapetlana - ice.
dikgaraga - engines; machinery; big things.
dikgare - razor blades.
dikgare - rind or peel of melon. '.
dikgare - rings used as cushions on the head; a crown of porcupine quills.
dikgaswa - THE DIM. dikgaswana is more frequently used, same as makgasa and matanta, rags.
dikgata - skulls.:.
dikgatisê - pressing iron, same as diaene; a printing; a publication.
dikgatlampane - (same as "dikgantlape"), a species of lizard, or agama.
dikgatlha - handles of knives.
dikgatlhê - o din-, No sING., a meeting place of roads, or tributaries of a river, etc.
dikgatôê - steps; footmarks; action taken or to be taken.
dikgatshane - pieces or remnants of ox hide, or sole leather.
dikgatsh6 - sprinkle; sprinklings.
dikgekgele - tonsils.
dikgeleswa - lymph nodes; glands; groins.
dikgêngwê - bitter wild lemons; said also of bitter beer; same as bokgêngwê. 1p. Expr. kgêngwê o atle a lekwe.
dikgetla - used in smoothing the surfaces of earthen pots.
dikgetlana - o din-, avicle.
dikgêtlwa - longhorned rhinoceroses.
dikgetsi - sacks; bags; vil or criminal cases.
dikgi - (same as "dikhu thickets").
dikgobalê - injuries.
dikgobati - (same as "kgobata"), bark for string. is rarely used.
dikgôbê - (same as "dikgobê"), cereals boiled whole; boiled corn and beans mixed. prov.go tlhaba kgdbê ka mutlwa.
dikgôbêl6 - hollows at the sides of a cow's backbone, near the tail, indicating that the time for calving is at hand.
dikgoberêg6 - upsets; confusions; turmoil.
dikgôb6 - reproaches; insults, etc.
dikgobololê - reproaches; insults, etc.
dikgodu - boiled vegetable marrow from melons or pumpkins or native vegetables; the juices from water melons. prov. lerdtsê la makopê ga le na kgodu.
dikgodugotshwane - (same as "dikodikotswana"), the hollows under the knees; the back of the neck.
dikgofa - sheaf of corn being winnowed; bush lice; ticks.
dikgofe - (same as "magofi palms of hands").
dikgêgakgêgan6 - misunderstandings; disagreements; squabbles.
dikgoge - hooks including those used in gathering firewood; asps.
dikgêgêla - (same as "kgogedi"), creatures believed to hypnotise people or animals, and then draw them into a pool to drown.
dikgogetsa - (same as "dikgoge"), hooks.
dikgôg6 - crusts; scabs.
dikgogodi - (same as "magogodi"), debris left by a flood.
dikgêgôrôp6 - state of not being straight; state of being very crooked.
dikgêgêgôrôp6 - rings; spokes of a wheel.
dikgokêlê - (same as "dikdpêld"), hinges; safety pins; fasteners; buttons.
dikgêkgôtsh6 - (same as "dikutso"), the windpipe, the outer part of the throat.
dikgokong - wildebeest; gnus. prov. mogokong o gola ga o tswane.
dikgola - small round bones from an animal's leg, used by children in their play. prov. mmetla kgola ya borwa o e lebisa waabo.
dikgôlê - reims; thongs; euphemistic way of referring to snakes at night.
dikg616_ - bushes similar to the karoo bush.
dikgolobe - No sina. destruction or desolation caused by high winds.
dikgolokwane - little balls; knobs.
dikgololê - liberties; freedom.
dikgômana - No string of beetles put as a charm around the neck of a child whose brothers and sisters have died.
dikgomma - No sING, marks or brands on the arms, chiefly made by burning.
dikgomo - cattle. prov. kgomo modimo o nko e metsi.
dikgong - wood; timber.
dikgono - (same as "dijabana"), elbows.
dikgônê - No persuasions, seldom used.
dikgopa - snails.
dikgopakgopets6 - hurdles; obstacles.
dikgopana - young/small snails, the shells are used as decorative beads and for exercising the gums.
dikgopane - mussel shells.
dikgope - grasshoppers; species of locust not assed as food; unmarried persons.
dikgopis6 - offences; scandals.
dikgop6 - ribs.
dikgopu - stalks of pumpkins, melons, etc.
dikgora - din-, hedges; fences; this word is also used to refer to illegitimacy of a child.
dikgoreletsi - AND 10, and kgoreletsi, sore point; a hindrance; an obstacle.
dikgori - wild turkeys; bustard kori.
dikgôr6 - entrances; gateways; passages; passes through mountains, etc.; homes or families.
dikgorogoba - small isolated swellings; the Bible is referred to by some as lokwalo lwa mmala wa kgorogoba.
dikgorola - grains or tufts of corn still attached to the corn stem; ticks, same as dikgofa.
dikgêsana - DIM. kgosi, junior-chief; princes.
dikgôthê - scales.
dikgôtlhê - metals.
dikgwa - jungles.
dikgwaripana - smallpox [borrowed].
dikgwathis6 - oss), beatings; punishments.
dikgwerean6 - confusions; perplexities; entanglements; things much crossed and mixed.
dikgwethe - the thick of anything; ots of thick milk; solids in a liquid medium.
dikhadu - eggshells.
dikhankhana - NO SING., Same as dikhanakhana, delicious food.
dikhansele - {For| councils.
dikhelero - dice.
dikhiba - pinafores.
dikhi - (same as "dikhu thorny bushes that are thickly set").
dikhihiri - pv.oF lokhi, cartilages.
dikhobê - native-made shoes; veldskoens.
dikhodi - {ArcH.,same as dikutla, nests of hens or ostriches.
dikhohe - bush koorhaan, member of bustard family [borrowed].
dikhonong - pillows of ouds or dust.
dikhu - (same as "dikhi thorny bushes that are thickly set"),; thickets.
dikhubu - (same as "mehubu"), navels.
dikhudu - tortoises dikhuduthamaga.
dikhuduthamaga comPL - committees.
dikhukhu - (same as "dikgêlê"), mekgêlê, and disamporêla, umbrellas.
dikhukhu - dung beetles; scavenger beetles.
dikhukhwane - beetles.
dikhumêla - tapeworms.
dikhumê6 - (same as "mahumê"), riches.
dikhutl6 - ends; conclusions.
dikhutsana - the unfortunate; orphans.
dikhwaere - choirs [borrowed].
dikhwena - edible grubs.
dikika - stamping blocks.
dikidi - pieces or chunks as of meat; rcular patches of earth in a wide trench or canal.
dikidibatsi - anaesthetics.
dikile - spent a while; surrounded; enclosed; two against one in a brawl.
dikinane - oral tradition inclusive of mainane, see dinaane. os.
dikinipitang - pincers; tweezers [borrowed].
dikisa - help to surround.
dikêa - weaklings.
dikoba - laggards; things that like to go by themselves; unsociable things.
dikêbamêl6 - respects; services of worship.
dikêbê - hooks; barbs; bends, as on a line or road.
dikob6 - blankets; bedding; bedding things. EurHem. referring to sexual intercourse.
dikôbôt6 - cupboard shelves.
dikoduntwane - (same as "dikoloti and dikodudu"), tadpoles.
dikoi - rope skipping games; skipping ropes.
dikokobele - flying ants that are edible; moths; insects.
dikokola - ver.r. okola harrows; husks of the morula fruit.
dikokomana - ancestors; forebears; posterity.
dikokothane - stunted maize cobs.
dikêkwata - turneddown horns.
dikolala - cut round a hide.
dikoloi - wagons; motor cars; vans, etc.
dikolokwana - small bells worn on ankles during dances.
dikolositse - has made to revolve or rotate.
dikolositswe - has been made to revolve.
dikolosiwa - being turned round; being made to revolve; being revolved.
dikoloti - (same as "dikoduntwane"), tadpoles.
dikolotwane - sickness caused by sour porridge.
dikêma - songs of victory; songs of triumph; sometimes songs of sadness as when announcing the death of an initiate.
dikêmang - (same as "dikomand"), scoldings; bickering.
dikêmanê6 - quarrels; verbal disagreements.
dikomata - cus di-, the trunks of bodies, without arms or legs; animals with stumpy tails, like the Manx cat.
dikomoki - same asdikopi, |For}, cups.
dikompone - as living quarters of mineworkers; sometimes used to mean dikhampani, companies [borrowed].
dikongwakongwane - similar to digongwagongwana, things placed in groups or portions.
dikonkoreite - (For crushed stone; concrete slab, etc.
dikonopê - |For buttons.
dikonteraka - contracts; construction companies; companies that hire on a contract basis [borrowed].
dikontere - tar [borrowed].
dikonu - rotten wood; touch wood.
dikopa - people whose perfomance is always below expectation; helpless individuals.
dikêpêlê - pins; safety pins; buttons.
dikêpêl6 - songs; singing; hymns; hymn books; concert.
dikopi - (same as "dikomoki"), cups [borrowed].
dikopê - requests.
dikopololê - {arcu, keys. dikêrê 1. Expr. go iphaga dikêrê, to invite oneself to an affair; go ipaya dikêrê, to connive at some mischievous incident.
dikôr6 - No sinc, being bow-legged.
dikêr6 - ornmeal which sinks to the bottom when put in the pot before water starts boiling.
dikota - (same as "mokwatla"), backs of bodies. 1p. ExPR. go naya sekota.
dikêta - o din-, logs; sticks.
dikêtana - stumps; sticks.
dikoti - as shortened tails of cats.
dikotla - | things that nourish, as vitamins or mineral salts.
dikêtlêlê - dishes [borrowed].
dikôtl6 - o din-, punishments.
dikêtlêpê6 - AND. p.oF kêtlôpd, quivers of arrows; cartridges.
dikoto - epilepsy; epileptic fits.
dikotoise - (FoR) cottages; semi-permanent dwellings.
dikotokwe - (same as "bokotokwe"), meercats.
dikotswana - walls; low walls.
dikubu - hippopotami; totem of Bakubung.
dikuduane - ouds of dust raised by winds; dust storms.
dikudubane - (same as "dikgarubane and dikhadubane"), turtle.
dikukama - gemsbok or oryx gazelles.
dikuku - fat cakes.
dikukumoro - mounds; dumps.
dikungwa - unripe fruit, or berries.
dikunyane - tunnels; holes in side of a pit.
dikupa - very fine and rather hot ash; dust; prov. bogosikupe.
dikup6 - medicines used by doctors for homes, kraals and crop fields.
dikupu - large bottles made mostly of plastic; drums.
dikupu - stubs or stumps of legs or hands; teasingly said by ladies to a gentleman who shows no interest in love affairs.
dikuruets6 - wails; loud cries.
dikurwana - calabashes; vials; lamp bottoms for holding fuel.
dikutla - bow-legged.
dikutšho - (same as "dikgokgotso"), the windpipe; the outer part of the throat.
dikwaba - patches of white sores on the head; a fungus infection of the scalp.
dikwal6 - (same as "dibuka"), books; letters.
dikwana - (same as "dikonyana or dikwanyana"), vi. dinku, lambs.
dikwele - boulders that are large and round.
dikwena - crocodiles totem of Bakwena and Bangwanketse.
dikwididi - tadpoles.
dila - smear a wall or floor to a fine finish with earth mixed with a bit of cow dung and water, or simply with mud.
dilabê - as flies in food; motes, as dust in the eye; any offences against a person.
dilafala - be or become blunt; scratch, as a bad pen; cut badly, as a blunt knife.
dilafatsa - make blunt; damage the nib of a pen so as to make it scratch.
dilaka - smear much, as a woman plastering floors or walls with mud.
dilakapelo - [arcu] same as dimonamone, dainties.
dilakeditse - has done a poor job of whitewashing, etc.
dilakeditswe - has been badly done, as wall that was being smeared with mud.
dilaketsa - smear, or whitewash badly.
dilaledi - (same as "selealee"), tarantula spiders.
dilalêlo - evening meals; supper; Holy Communion; ambushes; lyingin-wait.
dilalomê - creatures including people, of a murderous nature; cruel people.
dilao - OLL. sleeping places; bedding.
dilatlhê - things thrown away.
dilau - private parts of a lion; rarely used, if ever.
dilealei - s di-, tarantula spiders.
diledu - chins.
dilêga - become smeared as a floor or wall; be blunted. 1p. Expr. go dilêga pelo, to lose heart.
dilegile - has become smeared.
dilekane - equals; mates; balekane is in more common use.
dilelê - (same as "diteld weeping"),; complaints.
dilem6 - years. N.B. that selemê, meaning summer season, does not have a.
dileo - sinful things; maleo is in common use.
dilêpê - axes.
dilêpêlêl6 - as in wall hangings; things suspended.
dilete - deep pits; deep holes in the ground.
diletsa - musical instruments; diletsê is in common use.
diletseng - di letseng, lit., sleeping things; old events including quarrels; old history. prov. tlhdtlhê legolo le tsosa di letseng. dilo mreRJ., frown; scowl; look askance; look angrily.
dilê - things. prov. dilê makwati di kwatabolotswa mo go ba bangwe.
dilogêl6 - lit. things for weaving, hence weaver's looms.
dilogê - woven things; spider webs; maobi, is frequently used.
diloka - grass seeds which stick to othes; blackjacks.
dilôk6 - black earth; hard baked earth.
dilola - frown at; look askance at; look angrily at.
dilolola - re-do the smearing of a wall or floor with earth mixed with dung.
diloma basêtlha - minute ticks whose bite causes tick fever.
dilomôê - precipices; unscalable crevices between rocks; deep chasms.
dilêp6 - pillow-slips; pillow-cases [borrowed].
dilwana - lit., small things; goods; household goods; othing.
dima - thought to be the verb from which the noun Modimo, God, comes; to initiate or create; carries the force of a searching, penetrating insight into men and things; it may also mean to excel. See also sema and itshema.
dimane - hollows in holes or rocks; swarms of honey bees; fiercest type of bees.
dimanêg6 - glue; gums; any adhesives.
dimanka - (same as "mebidi or mmopo"), maize, mealies; mebidi is the generally accepted word.
dimao - a long awl for sewing skins; knitting needles; an eyeless needle.
dimap6 - pegs; nails; pegs treated with a potion or charm believed to strengthen a kraal, fields or homestead against witchcraft.
dimati - boards; planks; tables.
dimatla - things that are flat, as glass or boards, etc.; things that are large and extensive, but with no openings; silly or foolish people.
dime - whips.
dimegediwa - being revealed, or made to be observed.
dimeku - as of sweet reed, 1p. expr. bogale jaaka lomeku. N.plants.
dimêlêla - be very wise; a madness or destructiveness; be faint, as from thirst or hunger; vanish from sight; a distant object.
dimenê - curved things.
dimêpa - honey-combs; mamêpe is the form generally accepted.
dimetšane - neckrings; necklaces.
dimfe - [DJ, rock squirrels.
dimo - ¢-, siING. oF bodimo, giant.
dimohetse - has been a god; (it) is cold.
dimokana - be giddy; be mentally confused; be false to one's profession; dissemble.
dimokantsê - has made giddy; has confused; has caused to be false, etc.
dimokantswê - has been made giddy, etc.
dimokanya - make giddy; confuse; cause to be false; make a thing appear what it is not.
dimokanye - is giddy confused, etc.
dimola - ê, act as a madman; act contrary to a community's recognised custom; destroy by innovation.
dimologa - appear unexpectedly; happen by chance; take place without any known cause.
dimologile - appeared unexpectedly; happened by chance; took place without any known cause.
dimolotsê - has acted as a madman.
dimonamone - AND wild, sage-like flowering plants with sweet sap; sweets.
dimone - weak sore eyes; reeds for sucking water through.
dimosa - cause to introduce new customs; bring about innovations by opening the eyes to the supposed value of the new things, believed to be the action of Badimo on the minds of men.
dimositse - has caused the introduction of new customs.
dimositswe - has been caused to introduce new customs.
dimôêta - (same as "dipdta or mabêta"), walls or banks of earth; river banks.
dimotse - has acted as a madman; has acted contrary to a community's recognised custom; has destroyed by innovation.
dimpa - DIAL. VAR, Same as dithupa, lashes or canes.
dimpa - bellies.
dimpe - nickname for someone with a big belly.
dimphe - tapeworms.
dimphê - gifts; presents.
dimpu - brackish land or salty areas where animals lick; saltlick.
dimumu - mumu, the dumb.
dinaane - (same as "dikinane"), stories, especially simple ones without a moral.
dinaga - the veld; a portion of land; the countryside, as differentiated from town or urban areas.
dinaka - and naka horns, wind instruments played by lipvibration. 1p.ExPR. matlhd a dinaka, squint eyes; pRov. go tlholwa ga se go lêma dinaka.
dinaka - thanksgiving feasts, similar to dikgafêla.
dinakaladi - (same as "menakaladi"), small edible bulbs.
dinakale - the staff of a spear; a forked stick for pegging bushes and trees when putting up a fence.
dinakangwedi - (same as "diboneganawa"), greenflies; glowworms.
dinakare - brooches; decorated buckles or asps.
dinakedi - polecats; vet cats.
dinak6 - times; moments; occasions.
dinakwana - minutes.
dinala - finger or toe nails; aws.
dinalana - petty thief.
dinaledi - stars.
dinama - meat; variety of meat; large quantities.
dinamane - (same as "marolê"), calves.
dinamune - (same as "dilamune"), oranges [borrowed].
dinana - the mons pubis; area above pubes.
dinanatswi - (same as "tsininikani"), rain frogs.
dinao - feet.
dinare - buffaloes.
dinatla - the mighty; hard-working, industrious people.
dinawa - beans; cowpeas; euphemism for itoris.
dinêêlêl6 - o din-, curses; spells.
dinê6 - gifts of any description.
dinêpê - (same as "difêtd"), photographs; snaps [borrowed].
dingale - dells; natural holes, or hollows.
dingalê - aching; tiredness; internal bruises. PROBABLY "gala, internal wounds or bruises, as from a beating or carrying a burden, physical or emotional.
dingami - sponges.
dingana - COLL. is frequently used; cheeks.
dinganga - bushes of the acacia mellifera family; hook thorns.
dingangale - (same as "mangangale"), melons, when sliced into strips then hung to dry.
dingata - as of grass, sweet reeds, etc.
dingob6 - steep banks cut by water.
dingôpê - anv longêpê deep ditches; gullies; spontaneous nosebleeding.
dingwaga - years; traditionally Batswana used lunar months to determine the length of a year.
dingwaê - cultures; legends; traditions.
dingwe - (same as "dimo"), an ogre; a giant; a cannibal.
dingweta - potsherds same as dipea.
dinkg6 - water pots; earthen pots; ay pots.
dinkgwana - small ay pots; used as though it were synonymous with dinkgê.
dinkgwê - loaves of bread.
dinkôê - noses.
dinku - sheep.
dinnannê - such and such things; the so and so's.
dinnyê - vulvas.
dinêd - drinks including intoxicating ones.
dinêga - snakes.
dinêka - hips; pelvis; ilia; flanks.
dinoka - (same as "melapê rivers").
dinoko - nodes; syllables.
dinoko - porcupines.
dinokwane - robbers; rascals.
dinônê - blesbuck.
dinonelel6 - to wet slightly, slightly damp things.
dinonyane - of any kind.
dinopolê - NO SING., pieces of information; information acquired by secret or investigative means.
dinotagi - alcohol.
dinotala - rash which goes inside, making children restless.
dinêt6 - tonic sol-fa; also staff notation [borrowed].
dinôt6 - big hammers; notation.?.
dinotshe - bees; honey bees; honey.
dinta - lice. PRov.nta ya selomêla kobong.
dintêêl6 - waves.
dintê6 - strips; things used for beating, as whips, canes; lashes.
dintha - and ntha, thin membranes of cartilage found in lean meat; tough meat(s).
dinthe - walking sticks generally used by the aged.
dinthê - wounds; injuries.
dinti - (same as "dikgobati strings made of bark").
dintlha - points as of thorns; mountains peaks; points, as in a sermon; items, as in an agenda; areas or sides as of a village or town.
dintlhaga - (same as "diitlhaga"), nests; birds' nests.
dintlhana - DIM. dintlha, suburbs; outlying parts of a town; affixes; formatives.
dintlhwa - edible flying ants, seen usually during the rainy season.
dintlo - (same as "matlo houses").
dintša - dogs.
dintšhane - and losane pio. ntshe, young ostriches.
dintšhe - sweet reeds.
dintshê - the lees or sediment of traditional beer.
dintshi - and ntshi, shores; eyelashes.
dintshê - (same as "maso deaths").
dintsh6 - serving spoons ladles, especially those the size of a paddle.
dintshu - gizzards.
dintshwana - (same as "diswana"), vi. oF dintshd, spoons; cutlery, tablespoons; knives and forks.
dintsi - flies.
dintsu - eagles; cranes; hoists.
dintsutsu - small penises.
dintwa - fights; wars; armies.
dinwane - details; havens; fully ripe vegetables.
dinwêl6 - drinking vessels.
dinya - (same as "dingad jokes"),; jesting; nonsense.
dinyana - childish things; childish behaviour; foolishness; nothingness.
dinyaê - (same as "dinyawa or dinya"), both of which are less used; jokes.
dinyatsi - lovers regarded by society as illicit sweethearts or paramours with no hope of getting married.
dinyê - groins; pubic area; vulva.
dinyêma - chronic sicknesses.
dinyêba - (same as "dinywaba ditlhanare"), dithabalakane, etc., riddles.
diê - (same as "dild"), things.
diobê - long pole with a hook.
diôb6 - (same as "maêbê sheds"),; booths; makeshift dwelling structures.
diodi - lands alongside adjacent to streams; peninsulas.
dioka - (same as "seokomana"), large, powerful animals such as elephants, hippos, ete.
diokomêlabagae - peep AND bagae, residents, same as diokomêlabagwê, a peephole in a wall, hence difensetere, a foreign form, is more commonly used; windows.
diêlamelêra - breasts of young girls.
diole - Same as maokwane, oils [borrowed].
diolo - antheaps; anthills.
diope - (same as "ditshega boys' front pieces"), worn to hide nakedness.
dioti - similar to masêka rings for the ankle.
dipaangpang - urticarial rash.
dipabalêlo - safe-keeping; safeguarding.
dipabi - roasted corn which is ground and taken as food for the journey by travellers.
dipadi - (same as "mabadi"), scars.
dipafala - become overbearing; domineer.
dipakôê - (same as "dipantlelôkê"), water bags.
dipakôê - similar to mabôkê, praise.
dipala - ann pala, plans; burns or scorchmarks due to basking by a fire.
dipalamôê - ladders; things by which to imb; means of transport; vehicles for transporting passengers.
dipalêl6 - bindings round the tops of hedges, or thatch; laths.
dipalê - numbers; reckonings; reading; mathematics; arithmetic.
dipanana - bananas [borrowed].
dipanang - (same as "dipampang or dikwaba"), the latter in frequent use, impetigo; patches of white sores on the head.
dipane - ANDN.pans; saucepans; spans, as of oxen [borrowed].
dipanêrê - spanners [borrowed].
dipantlelôk6 - s di-, |For water containers; water bags used by travellers.
dipapalagae - parrots.
dipapats6 - sales; merchandise; advertisements; canvassing support for.
dipapetla - flat objects, as slabs or stones.
dipapêtlana - pi. oF papêtla, small flat objects such as coins, hence money.
dipaposane - tributaries of a river.
dipata - road wide enough for vehicles [borrowed].
dipata - pockets.
dipatika - inconveniences.
dipatlêl6 - ceremonies in which prospective in-laws solemnise marriages; searches.
dipatlêl6 - open spaces; playgrounds for children.
dipatê - iffs.
dipatolo - anvils.
dipê - CLS.8 AND 10,0; none; any; certain people.
dipeana - (same as "mabeana and diphego"), potsherds.
dipêba - mice; rats.
dipebe - (same as "mabebe"), cream.
dipego - reports.
dipeipi - (FoR), smoking pipes; pipes.
dipeise - Same as ditlhomola or ditswabantlê, pimples [borrowed].
dipela - rock rabbits.
dipelesa - draught animals.
dipêlêtê - pêlêta, readers for newly literates; readers for beginners [borrowed].
dipelo - hearts.
dipênê - pens [borrowed].
dipeo - seeds.
dipeolane - (same as "dipeolwane"), swallows.
dipêpê - harlots; lascivious people; bitches in season; adulterers; similar to megwele and ditlhora, squirrels; dormice.
diperekisi - peaches [borrowed].
dipêtlêla - chips or shavings.
dipetlo - v.s.THE DIM. depetlwana, is frequently used; adzes; planes; scrapers.
diphadi - showers of rain.
diphaephe - |ror| pipes.
diphafa - (same as "diphofa"), feathers.
diphafana - beer mugs; calabashes.:.
diphailane - false stories; tales without any foundation; rumours; games of tennis; tennis racquets.
diphala - impalas; whistles; wind instruments played by vibrating lips; musical band.
diphaphatha - to din-, v.s. griddle cakes, buns that are roasted over hot coals.
diphaphi - (same as "diphatsa"), dibêtlêla, pieces of wood; chips.
diphaphê - wrappings; bandages; bindings.
diphaphoseborutêl6 - assrooms.
diphara - division between the buttocks, also between wristbones.
dipharaganye - (same as "dipharagang"), openings between rocks.
diphare - small bones of the forearm; musical wind instrument, used for blowing.
dipharôê - efts ina tock, etc.
diphatê - karosses; mats; that which is spread directly on the floor.
diphatla - w. EXPR. go baya lebêgê mo phatleng, to wait in expectation.
diphatlhana - porous.
diphatlo - chips of stone; fractions of; halves.
diphatsa - and lohatsa same as dihaphi and dibêtlêla, chips; splinters; couplings; danger.
diphatšane - baby's bedding. 1p. Expr. ngwana wa diphatsane, a child who suffers ill health or is crippled due to its mother's immorality, either before or just after birth.
diphegêl6 - heavy breathing; sighs.
diphêg6 - similar to dipea [arcu], bits of broken pots, etc.
dipheko - (same as "dithato"), charms used to cure or protect oneself from harm.
diphele - mountain goats.
diphelefu - o din-, rams.
diphepheng - scorpions. Ad.
diphêra - harebrained children; extraordinary things; inexplicable happenings; witchcraft initiated by a gobetween.
diphethekganê - dangerously changing situations; dangerous heaving; tossing.
diphetla - swifts.
diphetogê - changes.
diphil6 - (same as "diphilê kidneys"), meat that is reserved for the elders in a Tswana community.
diphina - food cast to dogs; unsightly things; matlhê a diphina, eyes that are sore and discoloured underneath through constant discharge.
diphinya - flatus.
diphirimisi - No as ditsiebadimo, nonsense; go bua diphirimisi, to talk nonsense.
diphofa - similar to diphuka, feathers.
diphofu - elands.
diphogê - crowns of heads; the fontanelles; diphogwana is in general use.
diphogwana - crowns of babies' heads; the fontanelles of infants' heads; inflamed fontanelles of babies' heads were believed to be due to babies having come ose to another baby that had been treated with medicines meant to harm other babies.
diphoko - except in the prov. phoko kgolo ga e tswe ka ngwana wa motho, news; fame.
diphêk6 - o din-, uncastrated billy goats.
diphokojê - o din-, and bophokojê, jackals. prov. phokojê go tshela yo o dirêtsênyana.
diphola - side holes; tunnels.
dipholo - oxen.
diphêlôgôl6 - to din-, animals.
diphone - (same as "dipêbê and ditshêgêlateng"), dimples on the cheeks, regarded as a mark of beauty.
diphoni - cheekbones.
diphophi - (same as "dithothi"), drops of liquid.
diphori - rust in corn; mildew.
diphêrêla - massages; medicinal ointments, used as unguents or cosmetics; flakes or dirt removed when rubbing, as when a person is washing.
diphdêsê - mistakes; misses; errors.
diphoti - duiker; totem of the Bangwato of the Photi an.
diphotonono - [D1 corn-eating insects.
diphuduêgôê - (same as "dikhuduêgê"), which is more frequently used; commotions; tumults; troubles.
diphudungwana - young gnus; a god of the girl initiates (Bojale); a Bojale dance.
diphufa - jealousies.
diphufi - o din-, same as diphufa, dry stalks of lily plants.
diphuka - wings; features.
diphuphu - (same as "mabitla"), graves; graveyards.
diphuphu tsa matlhê - eye sockets.
diphuthêg6 - meetings; gatherings; assemblies; associations.
diphuthêla - wrappings; parcels; packages.
dipidi - maize grains.
dipilise - pills; tablets [borrowed].
dipina - songs; tunes; songs and dances.
dipinagare - pillars or centrepieces on which all the rest depend; centre poles of huts.
dipirinki - saucers [borrowed].
dipiriti - methylated spirits.
dipitsa - pots.
dipitse - horses.
dipoa - anv poa, bare; same as maboa, plains.
dipôbê - (same as "ditshêgêlateng and diphone"), dimples in cheeks or chins, regarded as mark of beauty.
dipodi - goats.
dipodile - shield beetles.
dipodingwane - dancers of the Bojale ad in white.
dipogis6 - (same as "pogisêgd"), afflictions; persecutions; oppressions.
dipogê - and pogd, sufferings; small branches put into water-pots to prevent water from spilling when carried.
dipoko - same as didimo, ghosts; spooks; places where people died unattended, away from home [borrowed].
dipôkôê - praises; praise-poems.
dipolane - (same as "ditogamaanê"), plans.
dipolaê - killings; murders; executions, etc.
dipoledi - a report.
dipoleiti - to din-, (FoR, plates.
dipolêla - veER.F. bolêla stings.
dipolêlê - (same as "dipolêlêlê"), sayings; statements; declarations; assertions; narratives; essays.
dipolitiki - to din-, (FoR) politics.
dipolo - a species of fish an eel.
dipêlê - penises.
dipoloi - gatherings (in sewing).
dipolokêl6 - barns; granaries; bins for storing corn; storehouses, including money banks.
dipoloma - diploma [borrowed].
dipomê - snuffers.
dipômpê6 - same as dipompi, pumps [borrowed].
dipônê - (same as "mabonê"), lights; lanterns; candles; lamps; lighted sticks used as torches.
diponyane - social birds; birds that live in a colony with huge nests divided into compartments.
dipopêg6 - AND 10, features.
dipopêlêlôê - processions; mass demonstrations.
dipopêl6 - o din-, AND sebopêlê, wombs.
diporo - rails; railway lines [borrowed].
dipêôta - (same as "mabêta or makêtswana"), earthen walls; walls.
dipoti - black-gum or pitch for sealing leaks [borrowed].
dipotsane - DIM. podi young goats; kids.
dipotsd - questions; queries.
dipotsolotsôê - investigations; cross-questioning.
dipounama - (same as "dipou"), lips.: dipodams on din-, gnus, nearly extinct, found in southern Africa.
dipula - rains; highest currency unit of the Republic of Botswana.
dipuê - similar to diteme, dialects; talks, disputes.
dipurapura - long loose outer garments; gowns, including those that are worn as indication of wearer's rank; robes.
diputlêla - parts of the handles of broken spears or axe handles, etc.; breeches; short skirts.
dira - hostile armies; enemies.
dira - similar to bêrêka, work; make; do; act.
diradira - do repeatedly; do constantly; do a little at a time.
dirafadiwa - (same as "dirafatswa"), being made to come to pass; being made to happen, etc.
dirafala - come to pass; happen; take place; become done; be accomplished.
dirafalêla - happen to; take place for; be accomplished for, etc.
dirafalêlwa - being subjected to.
dirafaletswe - has beena victim of.
dirafatsa - (same as "diratsa"), cause to happen; ensure an order or instruction is carried out; bring to pass; fulfil an instruction.
dirafeletse - has happened to; has taken place.
diragantswane - kick and ntswane, small stone, same as dirêêkane and dirêkêrê, catapults.
dirai - traps; snares; pitfalls.
diraka - (same as "dikôbêtlê"), cupboards; chest of drawers.
diraka - do much, often or violently.
dirakwa - being done much.
diramatla - umsy people; unskilled or inexperienced people.
dirane - (same as "diranye"),. NB. ga ba dirane sepê, they do not care for one another.
dirankure - (same as "digankure"), dibinjolo, digaba, one-string violin.
dirathana - premature baby; young one; said about the irresponsible and immature.
dirathi - (same as "dirunya moles").
dirêga - workable; practicable; capable of being done; be acted upon.
diregile - was workable; became acted upon.
dirêla - do work on behalf of; act for; make for; serve.
direpa - corpses (human) Fic. useless persons; N.a wild vegetable liked by starving pigs.
direpudi - steplike embankments surrounding a hut.
dirêthê - heels. 1. ExPr. go tlhanola dirêthe.
diretl6 - NOSING.,same as dirobê, entrails; the internal organs.
dirêt6 - similar to dibdkê, surnames; totems of people, ans.
diretologa - (same as "meretologa"), sour plum; ximenia and caffra.
dirêtsê - mud.
diretse - done for; has served; o mo diretse sentlê, you have served him well.
diretswe - been done for; has been served.
dirikitlhe - images.
dirile - has done; has done well.
dirilwe - is made; has been accomplished.
dirinê - (same as "dirite stubble"),; roots of grass.
dirisa - use; make use of; cause or help to do; dirisa sesepa, use soap; o mo dirisa tshingwana, he is helping him make a garden.
dirisana - co-operate; do together.
dirisantsê - have co-operated.
dirisantswê - have been working together; have been co-operating successfully.
dirisanya - cause or help to co-operate.
dirisanye - have co-operated.
dirisitse - has used; has helped to do something.
dirisiwa - being assisted; being made to do, etc.; being made use of.
diritê - (same as "dirinê stubble of grass").
dirite - prestige; imposing personalities; dignified behaviour patterns.
diritsa - the infirm; people who are unable to walk owing to prolonged illness.
dirobê - similar to diretlo viscera of edible animals, when cooked; tripe.
dirobêg6 - broken things, has very restricted use.
dirobi - rods; staffs.
dirobo - beer not properly or completely brewed.
dirokamêla - an open space in the hills where animals are visible.
dirokolo - shrubs of the num-num family that are medicinal.
dirolê - starved or emaciated people.
dirologa - become undone.
dirologile - has become undone.
dirolola - undo; annul.
diroloiwa - being undone; become annulled.
dirolotsê - has undone.
dirolotswê - has been undone.
dirôm6 - food not eaten by young people if older people are present.
dirêmê6 - impetigo. prov. ina lebe serêmê.
diromololo - oblations; peace offerings; things done to appease.
dirope - thighs; hind legs.
dirôêp6 - AND N.dinsame as digdpê, elephant trunks.
diropologane - creeping or imbing plants with reddish fruit.
dirêrêbe - lazy persons; sluggards.
diroronyana - deep red.
dirorwana - infants; the young of baboons, cows, etc.
dirota - humps of oxen bulls, etc.; hunchbacks.
dirotêlakgamêl6 - vDER.F. rota, urinate and kgamêlê, bucket; ground beetles which cannot fly.
dirothola - foolish people.
diroto - baskets.
dirowa - species of ceropegia, tuber eaten raw or roasted, nearly extinct.
diru - snares.
dirua - bed chambers; chamber pots, unfertilised eggs; rotten eggs; eggs that have not hatched.
dirubi - dens; fowl runs etc.
diruiwa - livestock; domestic animals; cattle; sheep; goats; horses; cats; pigs, etc.
dirukhutlhi - pv. or serukhutihi vagabonds; rebels; terrorists; troublemakers.
dirurubele - butterflies; ric. flighty women.
dirwa - being done; being made; getting done.
dirwalê - crowns; headwear; covering for head or feet.
dirwê - joints of meat; distinct parts in the anatomy of a beast, meant for a specific person, hence a special right, serwê, of the ruler to pronounce judgment.
disa - take care of; herd; look after; watch; disa o rapêlê, watch and pray.
disadinyana - old woman, disrespectful term that is seldom used.
dišaga - Same as disaga, saws [borrowed].
disaka - ],Same as dikgetsi, sacks; bags.
disaka - herd or watch over for long periods of time; look after large herds.
disakatukwe - handkerchiefs.
disana - (same as "disipi stumps"),; human stumps, i.e. human beings who in accordance with superstitious beliefs are killed and then buried upright to guard entrances to villages or homes.
disana - watch over one another; take care of each other.
disateretaga - (same as "mekibêlê or bomatlhats6"), Saturdays [borrowed].
diseditse - watched over; taken care of something for the purpose of, has herded for.
diselaga - traps.
disênkê - corrugated iron sheets [borrowed].
disêtlhana - a large oud of dust.
disêtlhane - a species of hare, smaller and less attractive.
disêtwa - (same as "disêtd"), images; carved things; idols; medimo ya disêtwa, carvings, carved images of gods.
disigo - grain storage baskets, large baskets made of grass to store corn. Traditionally, the baskets were kept underground in a cattle kraal.
disikalala - Northern Botswana dialect for wooden torch.
disikara - staves or poles for carrying anything.
disipi - (same as "disana which is more commonly used"), stumps.
disisa - help or make to look after; cause to herd cattle, etc.
disitse - has taken care of; is taking care of (in progress); has herded; looked after.
disitswe - has been herded.
disiwetse - same as dilêkêrê or dimonamone, sweets [borrowed].
diso - fools; idiots.
disê - sores; rash; rashes; blisters.
disê - spoons; ladles; dintshê is more frequently used.
disoa - granaries.
disola - [{For), soles; leather or rubber or any other soles for shoes.
disôntaga - Same as ditshipi, Sundays [borrowed].
disôp6 - same as disupu or merê, soups; gravies [borrowed].
dišaušawane - (same as "bosaušawane"), vipers.
digašê - siING. oF bodixasê, cowards; cowardly people; nondescript people.
dišowane - large white vultures.
disuga - (same as "disoga debts"),; grudges. Ngwana o duêla disuga tsa ga rraagwê, a son makes good the debts of his dead father.
disukiri - (For), sugar.
disupanakê - (same as "diwatshe"), show and nako, time, watches; ocks; time-pieces [borrowed].
disurapa - (FOR), Syrups.
disutlhê - brushes.
disutu - suits of othing [borrowed].
diswaswa - No sina., badly prepared tea; tea made from lees, and hence not refreshing.
ditaa - (same as "itaya"), beat, strike.
ditaaka - (same as "itaaka"), not widely used strike or beat violently or repeatedly, or all over the body.
ditaakile - (same as "itaakile"), has beaten much.
ditadi - striped mice. prov. bana ba tadi ba itsiwe ka merêto.
ditaêl6 - directions; instructions; guidelines.
ditaetso - messages.
ditafolê - tables.
ditakana - shanties.
ditalana - (same as "digafa and dibaga"), beads, threaded or unthreaded.
ditama - be firm; be at ease.
ditame - was firm.
ditami - babies' teats, usually made from India rubber; dummies; babies' comforters [borrowed].
ditaê - (same as "ditaêld"), orders; regulations; commands; charges; statutes; death notice.
ditaola - divination bones.
ditaolê - orders; instructions.
ditapa - weddings; wedding dances; wedding procession.
ditatlele - date (fruit).
ditatol6 - announcements of deaths; death notices.
ditebalebelê - stewardship.
ditebêlêl6 - wakes; all-night gatherings prior to a funeral, etc.; expectations.
ditebog6 - colloquially malebogê is more frequently used; thanksgivings; thanksgiving ceremonies.
ditedi - |p}, the blood that is evacuated with mucus in dysentery.
ditedu - beards; beard.
ditêêla - rarely used; emphatic form of itêêla, hit; beat; strike someone for the purpose of.
ditê€mane - diamonds.
diteketê - similar to dititêo, bruises; beatings.
ditekôê - trials; tests; examinations; attempts; temptations.
diteledimo - species of wild tulip, very poisonous.
ditêlêk6 - expulsions; deportations.
ditelele - large intestine.
ditel6 - (same as "dileld"), cries, wailing, mourning; complaints.
ditema - (same as "diêkêrê"), small subdivisions of a field; plots; paragraphs.
ditêmalo - habits; customs; courses.
ditemana - paragraphs; a verse.
diteme - (same as "maleme tongues"),; languages; dialects.
ditem6 - (same as "bolemê ploughed lands").
ditena - bricks; Batswana make walls with dipolwane, bricks that are used before they have dried [borrowed].
ditenêg6 - state of being upset or angry.
diteng - NOSING., same as mateng; the entrails; the contents, as of a book.
diteof6 - (same as "dibe"), sins; mistakes; faults.
diterei - Same as dikinkibdrêto, trays [borrowed].
diterekêgute - inspanning equipment [borrowed].
diterêkêrê - same as ditshukudu-tsa-temo, tractors [borrowed].
diterena - trains [borrowed].
diterentshe - chain connecting the yokes of oxen.
diterentšhe - transshipment [borrowed].
diterole - trolleys [borrowed].
ditêwa - more emphatic than itêwa, being beaten; being hit.
dithaba - hills; mountains.
dithaêlê - temptations.
dithaga - fire finches; red billed quelea and other grain-eating birds.
dithaka - eyeballs; companions; peers.
dithakadu - antbears; totem of the Batlêkwa.
dithakangwaga - species of ground plants.
dithakga - similar to ditswerere, neat; ever; skilful, used of persons; dextrous.
dithakôê - stone walls.
dithama - a plant with beetroot-like tubers; beetroot.
dithamaga - cattle.
dithamane - shrub that bears bean-like nuts.
dithankgole - wild dogs.
dithapêlê - prayers; pleadings.
dithapê - and lorapêd strings; cords; ropes.
dithapê - stones (of fruit), pits.
ditharaang - similar to mararaane, encumbrances.
dithari - soft skins for carrying babies on mothers' backs; cradles; pouches for carrying babies in.
dithata - No power.
dithatha - morsels of food.
dithatê - similar to maratd, love affairs; whims; intentions; desires.
dithêbê - shields; lowest currency unit of Republic of Botswana.
dithebol6 - authorisations; permission.
dithêka - mathêka is more frequently used; loins.
dithekisi - (For, taxis.
dithekis6 - auctions; sales.
dithêk6 - prices; purchases.
dithêkê - end of the shaft or staff; the grasping part of spears; encirclings.
ditheledi - human kneecaps.
dithêmê - [ror), difficult words; special words.
dithêmôê - things which have been chopped; areas of wood that are being chopped.
dithêrê - marrow; thin and emaciated bodies.
dithetelêl6 - NosiNG., thetelêlê, hindrances; hurdles; obstacles.
dithetlwa - wild berries of Grewia flava, commonly known as moretlwa, eaten or used in brewing khadi.
dithibedi - notches in yoke frame, or in a stick for a pack-ox's nose.
dithib6 - lids.
dithini - tins; cans [borrowed].
dithiri - individual and almost countable hairs, as on a balding head.
dithit6 - (same as "dititd less frequently used"), stems of plants or roots of words; tree trunk.
ditho - scarecrows; ghosts.
dithoba - teats. ID. EXPR. go baba dithoba.:.
dithêbê - o din-, fruits of the morêbê bush, rarely used; COLL. puzzle bushes; wild peach trees.
dithokgolo - a Setswana doctor's medicines.
dithogwana - the instep.
dithok6 - or long needles without eyes.
dithêkôê - dried discharge from the eyes.
dithoko - (same as "mathoko"), the sides, as of a head.
dithôkôi6 - dung of buck, sheep, hares, etc.
dithokolosi - similar to bomatholwane, mysterious beings; mischievous elves or dwarves believed to bring fortune or misfortune [borrowed].
dithola - (same as "thatholwana"), the poisonous fruit of the morola, which are green and white striped when green but a beautiful yellow when ripe; they are used medicinally. prov. o se bênê thola borethe teng ga yônê go a baba.
dithole - dust.
dithôl6 - kudu.
dithoromê - trembling; shaking, as in an earthquake; earthquakes.
dithosola - syphilitic rashes; syphilis (Ly.
dithota - hills; mounds; small areas of land.
dithothobolo - (same as "dithothobodu"), rubbish heaps; rubbish dumps. prov. kgosi thothobolo e êlêlwa matlakala.
dithoto - goods; property; substance (used only in the plural).
dithêtsê - seeds of melon species or plants, EUPHEM. refers to the itoris.
dithubegi - breakables.
dithue - pIAL. var. bonthufe which is more commonly used, large striped mice.
dithugi - type of plants.
dithulaganyana - to din-, children born one after the other.
dithulêl6 - thatch.
dithunya - guns; the more frequently used word is ditlhêbdêlê, flowers.
dithuê - and loruêd, THE COLL. PL.oFmaruê is more frequently used, inherited goods; possessions.
dithusa-pônôê - visual aids.
dithuthuntshwane - (same as "dithuntswane"), poisonous mushrooms; fungi. prov.mafoko ke a pele a moragê ke dithuthuntshwane.
dithutlwa - giraffes; the Southern Cross; it does not have a singular.
dithutê - courses; lessons.
ditibôê - [arcy,see didibê, patches.
ditilatshi - fetlocks.
ditilê - chairs.
ditilwana - tinkling ornaments.
ditime - (same as "ditotshe torches").
ditimêla - locomotives; trains.
ditirafalê - (same as "ditirald"), ditihalê and ditihalêlê, happenings; events that befall one; chronicles.
dititêlê - staves for beating skins to make them soft.
ditlaagana - temporary huts; shelters, as at the fields.
ditlabošeng - (same as "setlabosane"), come and Sa, new, new arrivals; recent arrivals.
ditladi - pv. or tladi, thunderstorms.
ditlala - hungers; droughts; famines.
ditlamara - surgical splints used in traditional surgery.
ditlamorag6 - summaries; epilogues; results.
ditlantlapê - (same as "dikgatlampane"), bokgantlampane or bomamagwatwagwatane, blue-headed lizards.
ditlany6 - see marago rarely used; buttocks.
ditlawa - commonly referred to as ditang or dikinipitang, tongs; pincers.
ditlelapa - asps; lapels [borrowed].
ditlelase - asses.
ditlelatšhe - pt.or ¢tlelatshe [ror utches of vehicles.
ditlha - bladders.
ditlhaa - jaws; cheeks; molar bones.
ditlhaba - flat roofs; elevated flat lands or flat mountain tops.
ditlhabêla - AND N.thatching pegs; cuts on the soles of feet.
ditlhabêl6 - sacrifices. The highest sacrifice offered as a prayer for rain was a human being.
ditlhabi - lit., pricks; pneumonic pains; shooting pains.
ditlhab6 - veEr.F. tlhaba small incisions made into the skin for introducing powdered medicine into the blood stream; incisions made into the skin for drawing out what is believed to be poisoned blood; scars.
ditlhaêletsany6 - communication.
ditIhaeletso - less frequently used.
ditlhaga - grass in its natural habitat; wild grass.
ditIhagare - tips of arrows [archaic].
ditlhaka - reeds; cane for applying corporal punishment; flutes made of reeds; ceremony in which reeds are played.
ditlhaka - grains of corn; letters of the alphabet.
ditlhakatIhakanôê - confusion.
ditlhakêtlhakê - s di-, same as setlhakê, less frequently used, islands.
ditlhako - shoes; boots; imprints of hooves; actual hooves.
ditlhakore - sides of a thing.
ditlhale - pv. or tlhale, threads; fibres.
ditlhalôê - divorces.
ditihamane - fables; fairy tales; folklore.
ditlhaodi - grammatical concepts, meaning qualificatives.
ditlhapats6 - insults; insulting.
ditlhapêl6 - ablution places; places for urinating at; activities in which people are drunk.
ditlhapi - fishes.
ditlharapa - dry branches or twigs.
ditlharo - (D1, be too quick, as in o ditlharo he is foolishly eager to be heard.
ditlhase - sparks.
ditlhatlhapala - meal very carelessly ground; chips or shavings sticking out in all directions.
ditlhodi - (same as "ditlhêla"), spies; lewd persons; harbinger of evil.
ditlhodi - lentils.
ditlhofa - (same as "ditlhofi"), borders of a garden or field.
ditlhofi - to din-, px. or tlhofi, same as ditlhofa, borders of a garden or field.
ditlhoka - o din-, similar to ditlhotlhori, chaff.
ditlhodkwa - matchsticks; grass stalks. w.expR. a ditlhdkwa di lalê.
ditlhêla - (same as "setlhdêlwa"), spies.
ditihôl6 - (same as "botlhêlwê"), creations; red rock hares, commonly known as botlhdlwê.
ditlhêmêl6 - armour; doors.
ditlhomeso - rafters.
ditlhong - hedgehog.
ditlhong - shame. 1D. ExPR. go tlhajwa ke ditlhong, and go tlhabisa ditlhong. prov. tlhong botho.
ditlhono - inner scrapings of a hide.
ditlhêpha - asses; groups; sections; portions.
ditlhêphê - elections; selections.
ditlhora - peaks; mountain tops.
ditlhôr6 - sources of discomfiture; nagging; irritations.
ditIhêtlha - maize cobs.
ditlhotlhole - scoldings; acts of scolding; haranguings.
ditlhotlhori - to din-, pv.oF tlhotlhori, straws; shavings that result from threshing corn; chaff.
ditlhotsa - people who are lame in legs or feet; people unable to walk normally.
ditliliniki - inics [borrowed].
ditloa - COLL. is more frequently used; nets.
ditlogolo - (same as "motlogolo"), nephews and nieces and grandchildren.
ditldka - abstemious persons.
ditlol6 - transgressions.
ditlontlokwane - (same as "ditsie badimo"), empty talk; trivia. ml.
ditloo - round beans or ground beans.
ditloofatshe - (same as "motloofatshe"), pulses (grain).
ditlêpê - combs of cocks or guinea fowls, etc.; tufts of hair left on the crown of the head; points on the heads of hornless oxen.
ditlotso - and < din- cosmetics; ointments, Chrism oil; things used as cosmetics; confirmations, as in the Christian ritual.
ditlou - elephants.
ditlowa - COLL. nets.
ditodi - (same as "malodi bark for string").
ditogamaanê6 - weave and maanê, plans; devising means; making plans; arrangements; devices; plans. It is both a process and a product.
ditoisi - snuff boxes; snuff horns; small containers for ointments or pins and needles, ete [borrowed].
ditoki - (ror), pieces.
ditokolol6 - similar to malokololê, joints; members of an organisation or association.
ditomêgê - cuppings; cupping marks; processes of making incisions for extracting blood, believed to cure dizziness.
ditôm6 - reins.
ditona - (same as "matona cabinet ministers").
ditontolo - tips of roots.
ditorôp6 - thongs or halters that pass between two yoke pins.
ditorêp6 - towns.
ditoto - (same as "direpa or ditopo"), corpses; carcasses.
ditotojane - armoured ground crickets or corn crickets, insects very destructive to crops.
ditsa-ntlo - household goods.
ditsaga - a large earthen vessel for holding brewed beer.
ditsala - friends; oviducts.
ditšale - shawls.
ditsalapa - household goods.
ditšalôê - collar bones.
ditsama - wild melons. The Basarwa, in particular, use them ina variety of ways as food.
ditsamma - a walking stick.
ditsankôê - (same as "matsank6"), tsanka, bruises or wounds inflicted by an instrument or agent.
ditse - vapourings.
ditsêbê - ears; pages; sheets of paper; embryonic plant leaves. 1. EXPR. go tlhdka tsêbê.
ditsela - ways; roads; paths. prov.tsela kgêpê ga e latse nageng.
ditsênwa - (same as "Setsênd"), mad people; the insane.
ditsha - sites of houses fields, etc.; building plots, erven, etc.
ditšhaba - nations; communities at large.
ditšhaka - swords assegais.
ditshamekôê - metshamekê is more frequently used, plays; games.
ditshane - No sING., poor quality sorghum.
ditshea - (same as "masea babes"),; sucklings; infants.
ditshêb6 - gossips; rumour mongering; backbiting.
ditshedi - living things; animals.
ditšhege - an erect | geophyte arising from a small corm covered with a tunic of fine brown fibres, family Iridaceae.
ditshêgêlateng - laugh and teng, deep; same as dipdbê, dimples in the cheeks or chin.
ditshêg6 - lots of laughter; laughter. 1p. ExPR. go ja ditshêgd, go swa ka ditshêgê.
ditšhêkê - pv. or t3hêkê (ror) cheques.
ditshenyêgêl6 - costs; expenses; damages; losses sustained.
ditshêphê - springboks. |.
ditshera - a Basarwa/Bushman dance.
ditsheru - salt licks; places in the veld where game come to lick; spiders living in burrows in the ground believed to be highly poisonous.
ditšhêšê - (same as "dithunya"), small edible flowers bearing yellow petals; nowadays term is used to mean decorative flowers.
ditshêtêla - (same as "dipêtlêla"), wood shavings.
ditshetla - skirts; points at issue; steps taken.
ditshêtlh6 - (same as "mesêtlhê"), ground creepers having yellow flowers and small sharp thorns; marshmallow plants.
ditshetlo - honey birds honey guides; birds that lead the way to a bees' nest; birds that are believed to lead the way to the lair of certain dangerous animals.
ditshetsa - (D.),journeys to and fro; camping places on a journey.
ditshika - and tshika veins or arteries; blood relatives; blood ties; generations.
ditshikarêl6 - (same as "ditshikari"), DER. ¥. sikara, staves for carrying burdens; premonitions of imminent danger.
ditshikarê - shoulders.
ditshikiri - pv. oF tshikiri, lumps or swellings sometimes seen above the navel.
ditshila - (same as "leswê"), dirt.
ditshilê - mills; round stones for grinding with; upper millstones.
ditshipa - members of the genet family; genets.
ditshipalore - (same as "tshipalore"), African vets.
ditshipi - irons; metals.
ditshipo - (same as "bontlolê or botshipo"), spring hares.
ditshisiri - fishmoths.
ditshitshi - swarms of flies.
ditshêka - ear wax.
ditshôlê - (same as "ditshwêle"), a hairy moth which is very destructive to othing and food.
ditšhêôlôp6 - fly (of trousers); zip.
ditshênêla - groans and moans.
ditshoswane - ants.
ditshuge - an erect geophyte arising from a small corm covered with a tunic of fine brown fibres; family Iridaceae.
ditshukudu - rhinoceroses.
ditshukudu-tsa-tem6 - tractors.
ditshup6 - signs; evidence; testimonies; exhibitions; fairs.
ditshupênyana - exhibits.
ditshuse - wild crocuses.
ditshutshwa - (same as "ditsutswa"), syphilis in early stages.
ditshwabi - and loswabi, dried fruits; dried sweet reeds.
ditshwabê - AND things faded or withered; guesses; disappointments.
ditshwabu - us di-, epigastria; part of the abdomen immediately over the stomach.
ditshwagê - hollows in trees; holes made by birds or borers on a tree trunk.
ditshwaiwa - minced meat boiled for long and deboned; biltong that is boiled and then minced by being stamped in a stamping block.
ditshwakga - lazy people.
ditshwakg6 - solitary things.
ditshwang - dried grass used for making mattresses; rarely used, the smell caused by bed-wetting.
ditshwan6 - physical likenesses; resemblances, particularly of individuals; similarities.
ditshwantsh6 - pictures; photos; parables; models.
ditshwaôê - marks; markings; brands.
ditshwarwa - (same as "ditshward"), mapantiti or magolêgwa, captives; prisoners.
ditshwaswa - sores on a kid's mouth.
ditshwêlê - grubs which eat dried meat and skins.
ditsiba - similar to didiba outer skins of a goat's bowels, hence musical instrument made from outer skin of goat's bowel; patches or pools in a river bed.
ditsidima - bells ringing together.
ditsiê - locusts. THE to a single locust and to a swarm of locusts.
ditsiêbadimo - locust and badimo, gods; nonsensical talk; day-dreams.
ditsiêkgope - bladder grasshoppers; toad grasshoppers and pyrgomorphid grasshoppers.
ditsientshwane - (same as "boijane"), grasshoppers.
ditsietsi - problems; puzzles; hazards; tricky situations.
ditsina - (same as "tswina honey"),; syrup; nests of mice.
ditsininikane - (same as "dinanatswi"), rain frogs.
ditsiritsiri - (same as "setotojane"), commonly referred to as dinyêtsê, corn crickets; metals or metal gadgets which tinkle like bells.
ditsitsiri - bugs; bed bugs.
ditsê - origins of people, tribes or nations; cultures; history.
ditsobotla - much mud or mire; places where there is much mud and mire; Rustenburg (town in the Transvaal.).
ditsurutsuru - tasteless things.
ditsusu - cockroaches.
ditswabantlê - come out.
ditswaisê - condiments; spices, etc.
ditswalê - (same as "diaparê"), othing.
ditswalê - (same as "ditlatla"), doors; shutters; aprons.
ditswammung - NO minerals.
ditswatswa - similar to dikhi or dikhu, thickets; impenetrable places in hedges.
ditswerere - similar to dithakga, skilful, neat people.
ditswetana - chicken.
ditukwi - toupees; head scarves [borrowed].
ditulê - AND N.(ul6, stools; chairs; places to sit; residences; habitats.
ditumammêôg6 - (neo.), sound and mmêgo, together; consonants; consonantal sounds.
ditumanosi - (neo.) sound and nosi, alone, vowels; vowel sounds.
ditumêlênyana - superstitious habits.
ditum6 - AND fame, or notoriety.
ditwala - (same as "malwala or ditshild"), mills; grinding mills; nether mills; lower millstones.
ditwega - (same as "ditôêmo").
diya - delay someone or something; prevent from going or doing.
diyêt6 - (same as "maêtê journey"),; visits.
duba - knead, as dough or mud, with soil and cow dung to smear a wall or floor or to build; mould bricks; ruffle and destroy mental, emotional or physical tranquillity; ruffle.
duba duba - mess about; disorganise things; confuse things.
dubadubana - cause one another trouble; trouble each other.
dubaka - cause a lot of trouble; bring about untold trouble.
dubakêla - cause a lot of trouble for the purpose of; bring about untold trouble for/to.
dubakêlwa - being caused a lot of trouble for the purpose of; being brought untold trouble, discomfiture, etc. for/to.
dubakwa - being caused a lot of trouble by being kneaded much or many times.
dubêga - be in a state of confusion; become confused; become kneaded.
dubegile - has become kneaded or confused.
dubêla - knead, or plaster, or confuse for the purpose of.
dubetse - has kneaded, or plastered for the purpose of.
dubile - or confused.
dubisa - help or cause to knead, or plaster.
dubisitse - has caused or helped to knead, or plaster.
dubisitswe - has been caused or helped to knead.
dubiwa - being kneaded, or plastered.
dudisa - (same as "nnisa"), cause or help to sit, to stay or to live at.
dudisetsa - cause or help to sit or to stay for the purpose of.
dudisetswa - be made to sit stay for the purpose of.
dudisitse - (same as "nnisitse"), has made one sit, stay or live at.
dudisitswe - (same as "nnisitswe"), has been made to sit, stay.
duduedisa - help or make to ululate.
duduedisitse - has helped or made to ululate.
duduedisitswe - has been helped or made to ululate, etc.; being helped to ululate.
duduedisiwa - being helped or made to ululate, etc.
duduediwa - being ululated etc.
dudueleditse - has ululated for.
dudueleditswe - was ululated for; has been ululated for.
duduelêtsa - ululate for.
duduetsa - ululate; shout with joy, as women dancing or on a happy occasion.
duduetswa - (same as "duduediwa"), being ululated; being shouted with joy.
duedisa - and payment; cause to pay.
duedisantsê - have made each other to pay; have extorted payment from one another.
duedisetsa - cause or make to pay for the purpose of.
duedisetswa - being made to pay for the purpose of.
duedisitse - has caused to pay.
duedisitswe - was caused to pay.
duêla - pay; make good; reward.
duêlêla - pay for.
duêlêlwa - being paid for.
dueletse - has paid for.
dueletswe - has been paid for.
duêlwa - being paid.
dukula - duku, pick out; pick stones out of the ground; pick something out of a person's tooth; cut meat off a bone.
dukutsê - picked out; pick stones off the ground, etc.
dula - (same as "na"), Sit; stay; live, una fatshe, sit down.
dula dula - sit a little; wait for a while; sit aimlessly or impatiently, same as nna nna.
dulafatsa - pollinate.
dulaka - (same as "nnaka"), sit anyhow or anywhere; keep long in one place.
dulakwa - (same as "nnakwa being sat here and there").
dule - has come out; has germinated.
dulêga - habitable; be sat on.
dulegile - has been habitable; become habitable.
dulêla - (same as "nnêla"), sit, stay or live for; wait for.
dulêlwa - (same as "nnêlwa"), being stayed for.
duletse - (same as "nnetse"), has stayed for; has lived for; has waited.
duletswe - (same as "nnetswe being waited for"),; being lived for.
dulwa - stayed, or lived; being in a state of sitting, staying, or living at.
duma - rumble; thunder, tau ea duma, the lion is roaring; pula e a duma, the rain is thundering.
duma duma - talk to one another in low tones; exchange views on a matter confidentially.
dumaka - threateningly and disturbingly.
dumakwa - being roared or rumbled.
dumalana - agree with; agree with each other; accept; believe.
dumedisa - greet; bid farewell to; cause to be believed; pass greetings to.
dumedisana - greet each other; bid farewell to one another.
dumedisantsê - (same as "dumedisanye"), have greeted one another.
dumedisantswê - being greeted mutually by each other.
dumedisanya - help to greet one another.
dumedisanye - (same as "dumedisantsê"), have greeted each other.
dumedisitse - has greeted.
dumêla - greetings.
dumêla - believe; accept.
dumêlêla - allow; permit.
dumêlêsêga - ible to believe; permissible; acceptable; able; credible.
dumeletse - has allowed to; has permitted to, etc.
dumeletswe - has been permitted to, etc.
dumetse - has believed; has agreed.
dumetswe - has been believed; has been agreed.
dumisa - cause an engine to ignite; rev. (collog.) an engine.
dumologa - cease to believe.
dumolola - be unbelieving; make not to believe.
dupa - to divine by smelling out; diagnose; to draw blood after making incisions to the temples as cure for dizziness.
dupaka - to smell out witches; diagnose illnesses etc., frequently or indiscriminately.
dupana - to smell one another out, etc.
dupane - have smelled one another.
dupêga - become diagnosed; be smelled.
dupegile - has been smelled; was diagnosed successfully; was successfully drawn, as blood from the body.
dupêla - diagnose; smell out.
dupêlêla - to get a hunch; to get a premonition.::.
dupêlêlwa - being predicted.
dupeletse - êlêla, has had a hunch; fig., has smelled a rat, etc.
dupêlwa - being smelled out; being forecast.
dupile - has sniffed or smelled.
dupisa - cause or help to smell out; diagnose.
dupiwa - being medically examined, by a traditional method.
dupolikata - duplicate [borrowed].
dusa - be pregnant; be in calf or lamb never used of human beings. 1p. Expr. dusa serobo, make false udder.
dusêtsa - be pregnant for, never said of people.
dusêtswa - being pregnant. np. never said of people.
dusisa - cause or make pregnant, never said of people.
dusitse - is pregnant. NB. never said of people.
dusitswe - has been pregnant never said of people.
dusiwa - being pregnant, never said of people.
dusôê - (same as "lusêd"), a tablespoon; a ladle.
duswana - a dessert spoon or a teaspoon, used as a VAR of dusê.
dutla - leak; bleed through the nose.
dutlaka - leak; leak frequently or badly.
dutlêla - leak.
dutsê - (same as "ntse"), is/are sitting; has sat; has lived at permanently.
dutswê - has been lived; has been sat down.
duwa - (same as "tsuwa and tswiwa being come out of"), or from.
