ea ga AUXV - PHR, it usually happens that; e a gae lwala, it usually gets sick.
eare - V.PHR, whenever; e are ba tsêna whenever they enter.
eatleere - PHR, it sometimes happens that; sometimes it happens that.
eba - v.PHR, also e bo, and then; e baoa tsena, and then he enters.
e be - v.PHR, it being; it would be.
e bile DER - AND DEFICIENT V., MOreOVeT; furthermore; also; even.
e bo - commonly used conjunctively to introduce speech, same as o a bo, by the way. e bo ne ne Avx.v.PHR, at this time; already; by now; should; rarely used.
e bong - to wit; namely; being.
ediha - (same as "e dira"), then; e diha gêna ba buang, then they spoke.
edira - (same as "e diha"), then; e dira gona ba buang, then they spoke.
e kane - PHR, Same as e ko ne, about so and so; probably.
ekare - PHR, it seems; seems like; if it should be.
e kete - PHR, same as e kote, it looks as if; it seems (to me); possibly (it is); probably. ekile con). PHR, once upon a time; it so happened once that.
eko ne - pur, same as e ka ne, about so and sO; So many; could be that; may be that; perhaps.
e kote - PHR, same as e kete, it looks as if; it seems; possibly; probably.
ele - PHR, being, as in metse e le mentsi villages being many, i.e. many villages; it being, as in e le sengwe, it being anything, i.e. it being so; if anything.
enama cond - PHR, fortunately, as in e nama o tsile, fortunately you have come.
enke - PHR,Same as e kete and e kote, it seems as if; probably; may be.
ere - PHR., Same as e ra, when; if, e re re tswa when we come out.
ereke - (same as "e reka"), rarely used; seeing that; since; because.
erete - PHR, same as e kete, it seems to me; probably; since; it appears.
erile cony - PHR, used in the historical past and introducing narration; once upon a time.
erote - PHR,Same as e kete and e rete, seems like; seems as if; it would appear.
ese - V.PHR, it not being; except for NEG. of e le. e se be kgotsa NEG. cons. PHR, whether. e se re kgotsa NEG. CONJ. PHR, lest; perchance.
e seng - it not being; not, must have a complement; e seng wena, not you; e seng jalo, not like that, not so. esi QUANT.CL.11A., only; alone; by him/herself. motho esi, man alone.
e tlaa re - PHR, introducing future action when, as ine ftlaa are batla, when they come; it will happen that.
e tlaa re kgotsa - PHR. IN PFT. TENSE, may be; possibly.
etlee re - PHR, introducing habitual action; whenever, as ine ¢le e re atla, whenever he comes; when it usually happens that.
etswa - PHR, Same as ntswa, whereas; seeing that; even though; yet. 6-8 INTERJ. OF DISSENT, No.
eba - flutter, as leaves of a tree in the wind; flutter uncontrollably.
eba eba - (same as "efa efa"), be undecided; waver; vacillate; waving, of tree branches; to go back and forth from place to place.
eba ebile - is undecided; has wavered, etc.
ebedisa - cause or make to bend, as waving corn, or grass or trees.
ebela - sway; move to and fro, like a tree blown by wind; be undecided.
ebelêga - shake or wave, as __ trees or standing corn; be swaying or surging.
ebetse - has swayed or moved to and fro.
edile - calm and composed; complacent; of pleasant appearance.
edimodisa - cause to yawn.
edimodisana - cause each other to yawn.
edimodisanwa - causing to yawn; one being caused to yawn by another.
edimodisêtsa - caused to yawn; causing one to yawn.
edimodisetswa - has been caused to yawn.
edimodisitse - has made to yawn.
edimodisitswe - has been made to yawn.
edimodisiwa - (same as "edimodiswa"), being made to yawn.
edimola - yawn; gape.
edimolaka - yawn repeatedly.
edimolêla - yawn to.
edimotsê - has yawned.
edimotswê - has been yawned.
edisa - cause or help to flow, also said of urinary incontinence or nocturnal enuresis.
edisetsa - make to flow into or towards.
edisetswa - being caused or helped to flow.
edisisa - make or help to flow strongly.
edisitse - has caused or helped to flow.
edisitswe - has been made to flow.
editse - has imitated.
editswe - has been imitated.
ediwa - (same as "etswa or etsiwa being made to flow"), as water; being imitated.
ee - yes.
efa - ward off; avert danger; lift up hands so as to ward off something.
efangele - (same as "efangelio"), gospel [borrowed].
efe - (same as "he"), mainly interrogative which; which one.
efosa - (same as "gafa"), cause to lift up hand so as to ward off something.
ehe - to express surprise; dismay; affirmation; contentment.
eka - lift the arm as if about to strike; give presents, done by father of bridegroom to father of bride.
eka eka - as if about to strike; threaten; fondle.
eka ekêga - to believe everything one hears.
eka ekegile - has believed everything one heard.
eka ekile - lifted the arm often as if about to strike; threatened; fondled.
ekêga - retch.
ekêla - threaten to strike, as by lifting up an axe.
ekeserei - (same as "seipone"), X-ray machine, picture [borrowed].
eketse - has threatened to strike as by lifting up an axe.
ekile - lifted the arm, as if about to strike; given presents, done by father of bridegroom to father of bride.
ekota - devil-faced fruit; Trapaceae.
elama - brood over, as hen over eggs; state of brooding; stay in the house after death of husband; be in confinement.
elame - has brooded; is brooding.
elametse - has brooded over.
elametswe - has been incubated.
elamisa - as hen over eggs.
elamisetsa - cause to brood.
elamisiwa - (same as "elamiswa being made to brood").
elamiwa - (same as "elangwa").
elangwa - (same as "okangwa state of being incubated"), as hen over eggs; be overshadowed by another baby resulting in the baby suffering inflamed fontanelle.
elangwe - (same as "okangwe being sat upon"), as eggs during brooding; being overshadowed by.
ele - S.6 AND 9 DEM. OF 4TH Pos. those and that yonder.
eledisa - (same as "edisa"), cause or help to flow; cause to desire. 1D. EXPR. go eledisa dinogana, to rain slightly.
eledisetsa - (same as "edisetsa cause to flow").
eledisetswa - (same as "edisetswa"), being made to flow.
eledisitse - (same as "edisa"), has caused ox helped to flow.
eledisitswe - (same as "edisitswe"), was made to flow; has been caused or helped to flow.
eledisiwa - (same as "elediswa being made to flow").
eleditse - wished for or desired; state of wishing or desiring.
elega - êlêga, deliver a child in a stooping position.
elegisa - (same as "belegisa"), assist childbirth; act as a midwife.
eleletsa - wish well or curse; wish well or good.
eleletsana - wish each other well; curse each other.
eleletsane - (same as "eleletsanye"), have wished each other well or cursed each other.
eleletsanwa - being wished well or evil, mutually.
eleletswa - (same as "elelediwa being wished well or cursed").
eletsa - wish for; desire; demonstrate.
eletsaka - desire greatly.
eletsakwa - being greatly desired.
eletsana - desire each other.
eletsanêla - desire for each other.
eletsanwa - being desired mutually.
eletse - has flowed.
eletsêga - be desirable; become desired.
eletsegile - is desired.
eletswa - (same as "elediwa"), being desired or wished for; being given a demonstration of; being shown how.
elola - raise, as a Sick person; remove silt or sediment from an open well; winnow.
elolêga - be removable, as sediment from an open well, etc.
elolegile - has become refined or cleansed.
elotsê - has raised; has removed silt.
elotswê - has been raised up; has been removed, as silt, sediment, etc.
emang - who, as in emang yoo, who is that; see mang and bomang. emara V.Ss.simp.,similar to emera, conceive, used of cattle.
emarisa - impregnate, said only of cattle; prevent healing in wound.
eme - is standing; has stopped; has married.
emeleditse - has caused or made to stand; has picked out. êmêlêla per. F., stand up; leave; go.
emeletsa - pick off.
emeletse - has stood up.
emetse - has stood for; has waited for; has stopped for.
emisa - set; to marry, i.e. perform marriage ceremony.
emisitse - has cil has marriage ceremony.. 6 reg aseeid < emia, same as emiswa, being stopped; being married.
emiwa - êngwa, being stood. emoga DER. F, Stand up to get out of the way; get out of the way; go away temporarily.
emogêla - give way to; give up one's seat or place; set off to some place with the express intention of quickly: returning.
emola - oBS. see emosa, cause to remove. emologa DER F. to do and stop sitting back lazily.
emologile - has stood to do and stopped sitting back lazily.
emolola - _ emololwa v.s.pass. < emolola, being required or caused to stand or to acquire an acceptable posture. | emolosa v.s.caus, help to make a thing acquire normal posture.
emolositse - has caused a thing to acquire acceptable posture.
emolositswe - has been caused to acquire acceptable posture.
emolotsê - has caused to stand upright or to acquire acceptable posture.
emolotswê - has been caused to stand upright or to acquire an acceptable posture.
emosa_ - SO as not to be an eyesore; cause to assume a normal posture or Position; position properly; cause or help to stand.
emoseditse - has removed for SO as not to be an eyesore; has caused to assume a normal posture or position.
emoseditswe - has been removed.
emosêga - so as not to be a hindrance, etc.
emosegile - has become removed; was successfully removed.
emosetsa - remove for; position properly for.
emosetswa - being removed for.
emosisa - help to remove or to position properly, etc.
emositse - has removed, so as not to be a hindrance or an eyesore.
emositswe - has been removed, etc.
emosiwa - being removed, etc.
ena - this one, nearer me.
enamêlê - on., enamel [borrowed].
enfelôp6 - envelope. eng ENCLITIC, has short form -ng, suffixed to main v. used interrogatively; what? o batla eng, or o batlang, what do you want? THE PHR. eng le eng, anything, or which things or lit., what and what? [borrowed].
engelosoutu - epsom salts [borrowed].
enjene - engine [borrowed].
eno - this one nearest me.
eno s - your and yours (SING. + PL), refers to 2ND PERS.,/7a eno, your father; ba ga eno; your people, or your neighbours.
enšorense - itshireletso, insurance [borrowed].
entetse - (same as "kentetse"),; has inoculated, vaccinated or injected.
entetswe - (same as "kentetswe has been inoculated"), vaccinated or injected.
entile - has inoculated, vaccinated or injected.
entisa - (same as "kentisa"), cause or help to inoculate, vaccinate or inject.
entiwa - (same as "êntwa"), get inoculated etc., being vaccinated.
entseana - so, as in entseana o teng, so you are here (in this locality).
enya - Enyelane N. cL9- [borrowed], England. €0 N.CLS.4 AND 9 DEM. OF 3RD Pos., those and that near you; metse eo, those homes nearer you; kgomo eo, that cow nearer you.
eola - hold back; withhold or preventa person from doing; separate the good from the bad; winnow; remove top layer of dirty soil in a drinking well.
epê - CL9, any, none, anyone of; used most of time with nec. form ga, ga ke batle epê, I want none, or I do not want any.
epêga - be in a state of being dug; lends itself to being dug.
epetse - has dug for; has buried etc.
epile - has dug; has convened a gathering.
epilwe - has been dug; has been convened, as a (kgotla) meeting.
episa - cause or help to dig, etc.
epiwa - being dug, etc., being regularly urged to.
epolodisa - make or help to dig up; help to exhume.
epolodisiwa - being made to dig up; being helped to exhume.
epologa - be dug without too much difficulty; lends itself to being dug.
epologêla - be dug with ease.
epologile - has become dug again; has become sufficiently dug again.
epolola - means dig up, or out again; reveal what was concealed, expose a fault or misdeed; exhume.
epololana - lit., dig one another out; expose each others' misdeeds.
epololêla - dig up, or out again for or on behalf of.
epololwa - being dug up, or out. era gonne cCOoNj. [D.], because.
erêga - (same as "irêga and dirêga be easy-going"),; believe anything.
eregile - rarely used; easy-going; has believed anything or anyone.
ereka - PHR, because; seeing that; since.
eteletsa - cause or help to lead the way.
eteletsa pele v - pHr caus, make to precede or lead. eteletse pele v. pur. prr, has preceded; has led.
eteletswa - being made to take the lead.
ethere - (ror), ether.
ethimodisa - cause to sneeze.
ethimodisana - cause each other to sneeze.
ethimodisanye - have caused one another to sneeze. ethimodiswa _v.s. pass, being made to sneeze.
ethimolaka - (same as "ethimolanya"), sneeze frequently, or constantly. '.
ethimolwa - being sneezed.
ethimotsê - has sneezed.
ethimotswê - has been sneezed.
etile - has journeyed.
etisa - cause a journey; to undertake a journey with someone.
etla - coming; the eis a portmanteau morph acting as a stabiliser for the.
etlaetlana - love each other; be fond of each other; agree.
etleeditse - have prepared; encouraged; supported.
etleediwa - (same as "etleetswa being encouraged"), or supported morally, ete.
etleeleditse - was prepared; has encouraged.
etleeleditswe - being prepared for.
etleeletsa - prepare; make ready.
etleeletsana - prop each other up or help each other; give each other support.
etleeletsanwa - being supported.
etleeletsêga - be encouraged to do all in one's power.
etleeletsegile - was encouraged to do all in one's power.
etleetsa - prepare or get ready; facilitate the successful carrying out of; support; encourage.
etleetsêga - become prepared; be ready; be willing; capable of being supported or encouraged.
etloku - [0Bs], could be a transposition of ——— iketle, wait a bit.
etsa - imitate; impersonate; be like.
etsaetsa - used idiomatically, confuse; make to doubt, as to meaning or motive.
etsaetsêga - be ina confused state; wander aimlessly.
etsaetsegile - is in a confused state; be doubtful.
etsaetsisa - help or cause to confuse, etc.
etsaetsiwa - being ina confused state.
etsaka - imitate a lot; take delight in imitating.
etsana - < imitate one another.
etse - has watched, has gone for; has fetched; has measured out; has flowed.
etse tlhôk6 - has needed; has taken notice of; has paid attention. etsho sposs.,our + OUFS (SING. + PL.), 1ST. PERS. ITA etsho, our father.
etshwa - [DJ,a bowl made of hide by the people of the Kgalagadi.
etsisa - cause or help to imitate.
et3wa - (same as "epiwa"), being dug.
etswe - being gone for; being fetched.
eu - (same as "ebu"), yes; incidentally; as a matter of fact. Generally requires a complement.
