fadile - has scraped, as a pot.
fadisa - cause to scrape.
fadisisa - 1nr. < fadisa, scrape intensely and vigorously.
fadisitse - has caused to scrape.
fadisitswe - has been caused to scrape.
fadisiwa - being caused to scrape.
fadiwa - (same as "falwa"), being scraped. fafa mNTERJ., sudden seizure, as in a fit.
fafalala - be extravagant; become wasteful.
fafalêla - (same as "fafalala be extravagant"),; become profuse and wasteful.
fafama - have a fit; be convulsed; be startled.
fafamisa - (same as "fafamosa"), cause to have a fit; startle; throw one into convulsions; make violent.
fafamoga - be violent.
fafamosa - similar to fafamisa, cause to have a fit; startle; make violent.
fafamositse - has caused to have a fit; have startled or made violent.
fafamositswe - has been caused to have a fit; have been startled or made violent.
fafamosiwa - being made to have a fit; being made violent or excitable.
fafara - granulate; cause to become particles; convert into particles.
fafarêga - give off particles; become granulated.
fafaregile - has given off particles; is well winnowed.
fafetla - toss about, as the wind.
faga - pour meal, tea, coffee, etc. into boiling water.
fagêga - be poured into boiling water.
fagêla - tea or coffee into boiling water for someone; give someone meal, tea, coffee, to enable the person to prepare a meal or a.drink.
fagêlana - mutually help to pour meal tea, coffee into boiling water; give each other meal.
fagêlwa - poured into boiling water, as meal, tea or coffee for.
fagetse - has poured meal, tea or coffee into boiling water for.
fagetswe - has been poured into boiling water; as meal, tea, or coffee for.
fagile - has poured meal, tea or coffee etc. into boiling water.
fagisa - cause to pour meal, etc. into boiling water.
fagisiwa - being helped to prepare a meal when water is on the boil.
fagiwa - being poured into boiling water of meal, tea or coffee; being held back, of a quarrelsome person or venturesome child.
fagodisa - help or cause to castrate.
fagodisana - help each other to castrate.
fagodisanye - have helped each other to castrate.
fagodisitse - has helped or caused to castrate.
fagodisitswe - has been helped or caused to castrate.
fagofa - (DJ. < mafega, be quick to do anything.
fagofile - was quick to do anything.
fagola - castrate.
fagolaka - castrate many.
fagolana - castrate each other.
fagolanye - have castrated each other.
fagolêga - be castrated; lend self to being castrated.
fagolegile - is castrated.
fagolêla - castrate for.
fagolêlwa - being castrated for.
fagotse - has castrated.
fagotswê - has been castrated.
fala - scrape a surface, as a pot with a scraper; or wood with a knife; scratch a wound till the scab falls off.
faladisa - (same as "falatsa"), cause or help to seek refuge; cause to run away from home; cause to scatter; impoverish; help to spread.
faladisitse - has caused to seek refuge by abandoning home; have made to spread; have caused to scatter.
faladisitswe - has been caused to seek refuge elsewhere; has been forced to abandon home; has been scattered; has been made to migrate.
faladisiwa - being caused to seek refuge, etc.
faladitse - has caused to scatter or to seek refuge away from home.
faladiwa - (same as "falatswa being scattered"),; being dispossessed; being caused to migrate.
falala - seek refuge elsewhere, from deprivation, drought, etc., become scattered or spread; go abroad.
falalêla - abandon home and seek refuge elsewhere.
falaletse - has abandoned home and sought refuge or help; has scattered; has become dispersed.
falatsa - impoverish; cause to disperse. fale pe. 4TH pos. cL.16. felê fale, the place yonder; Loc. abv. êma fale, stand over there.
falêga - become scraped; be well scraped.
falegile - is scraped.
falêla - scrape for. ie A.
faletse - has scraped for.
falodisa - cause to escape; rescue; see or hear indistinctly.
falodisitse - has caused to escape; has rescued; has heard or seen indistinctly.
falodisitswe - has been caused or helped to escape.
falodisiwa - being seen after a long while or from a great distance.
faloditse - has rescued.
faloditswe - has been rescued.
falodiwa - (same as "falotswa being rescued").
falola - escape when hemmed in, or surrounded; escape from custody; get out of danger; break through and escape.
falolêla - escape.
faloletse - has escaped.
falolola - rectify; set right, work which is badly done; leave one position, in giving evidence and take up another; change one's stance or testimony.
falolotsê - has rectified; has changed one's stance or testimony:.
falotsa - has caused to escape.
falotsê - has escaped.
falotswa - (same as "falodiwa being aided in escaping"),; being rescued.
falotswê - has been rescued.
famoga - be cut off, or chopped, as a joint of meat; be opened wide, of eyes and ears; be put or pushed back, of hair from the forehead.
famogêla - be cut off; be put or pushed back, as hair from the forehead.
famogile - has become cut off or chopped off, as a joint of meat, etc.
famola - cut off or chop off a joint of meat; open the eyes and flare the nostrils, as a horse after a race.
famolaka - cut off or chop off joint of meat; open the eyes and flare the nostrils very wide, repeatedly or in disgust or for no good cause, etc.
famolêla - cut off or chop off a joint of meat for, etc.
famolêlwa - being cut off or chopped off a joint of meat for, etc.
famotsê - has cut off or chopped off a joint of meat, etc.
famotswê - has been cut off, as a joint of meat, etc.
fanêlê - (For), funnel. }.
fanka - (same as "panka and kanka"), walk slowly, with legs far apart or taking long strides.
fano LOC - CL.16, isT Pos., right here, here.
fantisa - auction; sell by public auction same as thekis6 ka palabalo.
fantisi - an auction; a public auction.
fantisitse - has auctioned.
fanyafanya - be weak-sighted; be wanton.
fapa - bind into a bundle; wrap round; | wrap up.
fapaakana - crisscross; take turns; alternate.
fapaana - alternate; cross or pass one another; take turns; to differ (as versions of stories); to get cross with each other.
fapaanêla - take turns at. fapaangwa vV.s.Pass. < fapaana, being made to alternate; being made to differ; being passed by.
fapaantsê - has made to differ; has passed by.
fapaantswê - has been made to differ; has been passed by.
fapaanya - cause to alternate or cross with one another.
fapaanye - have passed or crossed with one another; be in a confused state; be mentally deranged.
fapaka - wrap round; bind many times.
fapakile - has wrapped round thoroughly; has bound completely.
fapana - bind each other; wrap each other up.
fapêga - become bound; become wrapped up.
fapegile - has become bound.
fapêla - bind.
fapha - chop or cut lengthwise; walk with turned-out toes; put up; out of the way; make special; tidy up.
faphaka - chop or cut large amounts lengthwise; arrange specially, a lot of things; tidy up.
faphêga - get chopped or cut lengthwise etc.; become special.
faphêgile - has become special; is special.
faphêla - chop or cut large amounts lengthwise; tidy up.
faphile - have chopped or cut lengthwise; have tidied up.
faphisa - help or cause to chop or cut lengthwise; help to tidy up.
faphiwa - being tidied.
faphodisa - cause or help to slap.
faphola - < fapho, slap.
fapholaka - slap repeatedly and mercilessly.
fapholana - slap'each other.
fapholanye - have slapped each other.
fapholwa - being slapped; being struck with the open hand.
faphotsê - has slapped.
faphotswê - has been slapped.
fapisa - cause or help to bind, or wrap up.
fapisisa - 1nr., bind tightly; wrap up well.
fapisiwa - being caused or helped to bind or wrap.
fapiwa - (same as "fatswa"), being bound into a bundle; being wrapped round.
fapoga - turn aside from a path; detour; go off the correct path and hence go astray.
fapogaka - keep going astray.
fapogêla - make a brief stop before proceeding on the way.
fapogêlana - give way to each other; make a brief stop at an acquaintance's before proceeding with a journey.
fapogêlanye - have given way to one another.
fapogetse - has made a temporary break on a journey; has given way.
fapogetswe - has been given way to.
fapogile - has detoured; has left the path.
fapogisa - (same as "faposa"), cause or help to detour; cause or make to leave the correct track.
fapolola - untie; unwrap; remove a bandage.
fapololana - untie each other.
fapololêla - untie; unwrap for.
fapololêlana - untie for each other.
fapololwa - being untied.
fapolotsê - has untied; has unwrapped.
faposa - cause or help to turn off; cause or help someone go astray.
faposeditse - has caused or helped to go astray.
faposêtsa - cause or help to go astray.
faposetswa - being caused or helped to turn off the path; being drifted aside for; being led astray.
fapositse - has sidetracked; has diverted.
faposiwa - being sidetracked; being diverted.
fapositswe - has been diverted.
fara - bring forth too many inferior ears of corn; hinder smooth childbirth; put something on the lap.
faraakana - (same as "faraana"), move in all directions; crisscross.
faraana - (same as "faraakana"), move in all directions; crisscross.
faraanya - cause to crisscross; entangle.
faraanye - has caused to crisscross; has entangled.
farafara - come from all directions; encircle and entangle.
farafarile - has spread all over; has spread about, as water all over, etc.
farafarilwe - (same as "faraferwe which is very rarely used"), has been spread about, as water all over, etc.
farafarwa - being spread about, as water all over, etc.
faraka - crisscross extensively.
farakana - move in all directions.
farakanngwa - being encircled and entangled.
farakantsê - has caused to wrestle or struggle together; has mixed up in a heap.
farakantswê - has been caused to wrestle or struggle; has been mixed up.
farakanye - have become mixed up in a heap; have moved in all directions, like traffic.
faralala - be spread out, as the horns that make going through a narrow passage difficult.
faraletse - has spread out, as fingers on an open hand. farana vV.s.REC., sit on each other's lap; cuddle. farantlhatlha reps, sudden state of chaos.
farantlhologa - be ina state of confusion.
farantlhologêla - attain a state of confusion.
farantlhologile - a state of confusion is attained.
farantlholola - do that which results in confusion; disarrange; rearrange.
farantlhololêla - bring about disorder.
farantlhololetse - has brought disorder.
farantlholotse - has thrown into disorder; has disarranged; has rearranged.
farasa - move about; move to and fro.
farasaka - move about much; be omnipresent.
farasanya - move about much; mill around.
faratlhatlhana - be in a disorderly state; be completely confused.
faratlhatlhantsê - has brought about confusion.
faratlhatlhantswê - < faratlhatlhantsê has brought about confusion or chaos.
faratlhatlhanya - cause objects to fall into a state of confusion; to disorder things.
faratlhatlhanye - has fallen into a state of chaos.
farêla - have a difficult childbirth; hinder at giving birth; put a child on the lap for.
farêlwa - being inconvenienced at giving birth; being put on the lap.
faretse - has put a child on the lap for.
faretswe - has been put on the lap for.
farile - has put on the lap.
farilwe - has been on the lap.
farisa - help or cause to put on the lap.
fariwa - being put on the lap.
farologa - differ; be unlike.
farologana - differ from each other.
farologantsê - has differentiated; has distinguished.
farologantswê - has been differentiated.
farologanya - cause to differ; make a difference; differentiate.
farologanye - have differed from each other.
farologanyeditse - has differentiated.
farologanyeditswe - < farologanyaditse has been differentiated.
farologanyetsa - explain difference to.
farologanyetswa - being differentiated.
farolola - remove a child from the lap; stop placing a child on the lap.
farolotsê - has removed the child from the lap.
farwa - (same as "fariwa"), being put on the lap, like a baby.
fasa - tie; tether a cow by the head.
faseditse - has tied.
faseditswe - has been tied.
fasêga - capable of being tied.
fasêgile - is tied or tethered securely.
fasetsa - tie for.
fasetswa - being tied.
fasitse - has tied for.
fasitswe - has been tied.
fasiwa - (same as "faswa"), being tied.
fasologa - become untied; be untied.
fasolola - untie.
faswa - (same as "fasiwa"), being tied.
fata - find; burrow; dig a hole, like a dog; take soil out of a hole; paw the ground, as a horse; dig for water.
fatafata - burrow a little at a time, dig a hole, etc. indiscriminately; paw the ground.
fataka - burrow, dig, etc. extensively; make holes all over.
fataladitse - has stretched out wide apart.
fatalala - become spread wide apart, as the legs; stretch out wide apart.
fatalatsa - cause to be stretched out wide apart.
fataletse - is stretched out wide apart.
fatana - lit., dig each other out, as out of sand or mud; to squander each other's property.
fatêga - be burrowed, etc.
fategile - is burrowed; has been dug out, as was intended.
fatêla - burrow for; dig a hole.
fatêlwa - being burrowed for ete.
fatile - has burrowed; has dug a hole.
fatisa - cause or help to dig.
fatisana - «Ec. < fatisa, help each other to dig for water.
fatisiwa - (same as "fatiswa"), being helped to dig.
fatiswa - (same as "fatisiwa"), being helped to dig.
fatiwa - (same as "fatwa"), being dug.
fatlha - dazzle; get foreign body into the eye; offend by being indecent, or obscene.
fatlhaka - dazzle; get foreign bodies into the eyes; dazzle much.
fatlhana - dazzle or get foreign bodies into each other's eyes.
fatlhanye - have dazzled one another.
fatlhegile - has dazzled; is bamboozled or mystified.
fatlhêla - dazzle for.
fatlhêlwa - being dazzled.
fatlhile - has dazzled; has got a foreign body in the eye.
fatlhisa - cause to be dazzled; cause a foreign body to enter the eye.
fatlhisiwa - being caused to be dazzled; being helped to dazzle.
fatlhiwa - (same as "fatlhwa being dazzled").
fatlhoga - move out of infancy, usually at age of adolescence; mature; grow up.
fatlhogile - has moved out of infancy; has matured; has grown up.
fatlhologa - become able to see properly again, as when foreign body has been removed from an eye.
fatlhologile - is able to see properly again.
fatlholola - remove a foreign body from an eye.
fatlhosa - cause to move out of infancy state; cause to mature.
fatlhosetsa - cause to move out of infancy for; cause to mature for.
fatlhositse - has caused to move out of infancy; has nursed into being a youth.
fatlhositswe - being made to move out of infancy.
fatlhwa - (same as "fatlhiwa being dazzled"),. fato inrers, rend asunder instantly; crack suddenly.
fatoga - be rent asunder; be cracked, as a cup, or a wall; be split, like a reed or a piece of wood.
fatogana - be split asunder lengthwise.
fatogantsê - has rent asunder.
fatoganya - split down the middle; cleave asunder.
fatoganye - has split asunder down the middle.
fatoganyetsa - eave down the middle for.
fatogêla - be rent asunder; be cracked.
fatogile - has cracked, as a cup or a wall.
fatola - cut down the middle; split; cleave asunder; cut through, as a plough.
fatolola - is digging out again; remove sand that is silting up a pool of water.
fatolotsê - has dug out again.
fatolotswê - has been dug out again.
fatotsê - has chopped down the middle.
fatotswê - has been cut down the middle.
fatsa - chop firewood to size; split by cutting; plane.
fatsaka - cut large amounts of wood to size; plane a lot.
fatsana - hurt each other, in a wanton fashion with some sharp instrument.
fatsêga - become cut, as wood cut to size.
fatsegile - has become cut, e.g. wood.
fatsetsa - chop wood to size for a purpose.
fatsisa - cause or help to cut wood to size.
fatsisiwa - being helped to cut wood to size.
fatsitse - has chopped wood to size.
fatsitswe - has been cut to size e.g. wood.
fatsiwa - (same as "fatswa"), being split by cutting.
fatšwa - (same as "fapiwa"), being bound; being wrapped round; being bandaged.
febara - (FoR, fever; malaria; rigor; gastric upset.
fedile - is finished; has come to an end.
fedisa - abolish; cause or help to finish; bring an end to; exterminate.
fedisitse - has caused or helped to finish; has brought to an end.
fedisitswe - has been caused or helped to finish.
fedisiwa - being caused or helped to finish.
feditse - has finished; has brought to an end.
feditswe - has been finished; was finished.
fêêla - sweep; sweep and tidy up.
fêêlaka - sweep extensively; sweep clean.
fêêlêga - be swept; capable of being swept.
feelegile - has become swept; has become well swept.
fêêlêla - sweep for.
feeletse - has swept.
feeletswe - has been swept for.
feetse - has swept; has tidied.
feetswe - has been swept.
fêfa - subside; becoming cool, as the day when the sun has been very hot.
fêfêla - become cool.
fêfêra - sift or winnow grain; shake up in a winnowing basket. 1p. Expr, fêfêra molaêd, shake off the law; be lawless.
fêfêrêga - become sifted, of corn or maize.
feferegile - has become sifted; is pulverised, i.e. has crumbled.
fêfêrêlwa - being sifted for.
feferile - has sifted or winnowed.
feferisa - cause or help to sift, or winnow.
feferisiwa - being caused or helped to sift, or winnow.
feferiwa - (same as "fêfêrwa"), being sifted or winnowed.
fefesela - breathe heavily as after crying.
fefetse - has become cool for.
fefeutla - as the wind; sway about, as a wind.
fefo - happening lightly or easily.
fefo s - light; easy.
fefofaditse - has lightened a weight.
fefofetse - has caused to become light in weight.
fefoga - capable of being blown about; come, or go quickly; be tossed about by the wind.
fefogile - has come or gone quickly.
fefosa - cause to hasten.
fefositse - has caused to hasten.
fefositswe - has been caused to hasten.
fega - [DJ], sigh.
fêga - (same as "bega"), be given, receive gifts graciously.
fegêlwa - be out of breath, sigh or pant.
fegetswe - has sighed; has panted.
fegofa - look around quickly or in an excited manner; take hold of a thing quickly.
fegofile - has looked around quickly, or in an excited manner.
fegola - take anything on the point of a knife, or a horn; spear something; rise up or repeat, as food after a hasty meal.
fegotsê - has taken anything on the point of a knife; has speared something.
feie - fig [borrowed].
feile - (For), file, rasp.
feisi - (same as "lebole fist [borrowed]").
feka - ulate, used of male dog or horse.
fekaka - ulate with many bitches or mares; be absorbed in the business of copulating.
fekana - êkê inrers., of sudden or surprising appearance and disappearance.
fekeeditse - has overpowered; has superior ability.
fekeeditswe - was overpowered; has been overpowered.
fekeediwa - being overpowered.
fekeeletsa - overpower.
fekeetsa - overpower; have superior ability.
fekeetsêga - become or be overpowered.
fekeetsegile - has become overpowered.
fekêla - ulate, or mate, as a dog or Stallion that is hired; give a larger portion to.
fêkêla - pass quickly into and out of sight.
feketse - has passed quickly into and out of sight.
fekile - has copulated (used of a male dog or horse).
fekisa - cause to copulate; bring a mare or bitch to be copulated with. fekiwa_v.s. pass, same as fekwa, being copulated with, i.e. of a bitch being served by a dog or a mare being served.
fekwa - (same as "fekiwa"), be copulated with, used of a bitch or mare.
fêla - however; nevertheless.
fêla - come to a finish; perish; vanish; waste away.
feleditse - has finished.
feleditse - has depleted.
feleditswe - has been finished.
felediwa - (same as "feletswa being finished for"),; being finished to the detriment of.
felegediwa - being accompanied either all the way or part of the way.
felegetsa - accompany; go with a part of the way with someone.
felegetsaka - overdo, accompanying others on trips; take delight in going a part of the way.
felegetsana - accompany each other.
feleka - speak so as to conceal one's meaning; be intentionally ambiguous.
felekile - was ambiguous by intention.
fêlêla - be used,up, as flour in making dough; fail to reach the bottom, as a rod dipped into a well.
feleleditswe - has all been used up.
feleletsa - use up; complete; give the final touches to.
feleletse - has become depleted.
feleletswe - has failed to reach the bottom, as a rod in a deep well.
fêlêlwa - be short of; run short of.
feletsa - complete a task for finish to the detriment of.
feletse - has completed a task.
feletswe - has run out of.
felê - (same as "lefelêd"), a place, a locality.
fema - avoid blows; ward off; parry.
fêmê - ¢-, (For), firm (company).
femêga - as blows; wardable as blows.
femegile - is avoided, or warded off successfully.
femêla - defend another; parry blows aimed at a third party.
femêlwa - being defended; being protected.
femetse - has defended.
femetswe - has been defended.
femile - has avoided; has defended.
fênê - a fan [borrowed].
fenitšhara - (FoR furniture.
fenitšharatshwani - %-, (FoR, suite.
fenngwa - being conquered; being overcome; being defeated.
feno - 1D. of lifting up, so as to look under.
fenoga - be thrown over; make room; sit back.
fenogile - has been thrown over; has made room.
fenola - lift up in order to look under; turn over, as a page; draw, as curtains that are shut.
fenosa - cause to lift or tilt up; cause to be lifted up and turned over.
fenoseditse - has turned over for; has made to sit back.
fenoseditswe - has been turned over for; has been made to sit back.
fenosetsa - lift up, or turn over, for someone to see under.
fenositse - has lifted up and turned over, etc.
fenositswe - has been lifted up and turned over, etc.
fentsê - has conquered; has gained victory; has defeated.
fentsha - cause to conquer; cause to defeat.
fentshitse - has caused or helped to conquer; has caused to defeat.
fentswê - has been conquered; was overcome; has been defeated.
fenya - conquer; overcome; defeat.
fenyana - conquer each other.
fenyeditswe - has been conquered.
fenyêditswê - has been defeated; has been overcome or beaten; mosimane o fenyêditswê ke mosetsana, the boy has been surpassed by the girl.
fenyediwa - (same as "fenyetswa"),; has been conquered.
fenyega - be conquerable; be beatable.
fenyegile - is conquered; is defeated.
fenyetsa - conquer for.
fêpa - feed; entice; coax, with a view to deceiving; irritate, with a view to making angry.
fêpêga - become fed; be well fed.
fêpêla - feed; provide food on someone's behalf.
fepenyeditse - has picked a quarrel.
fepenyetsa - [D.|, annoy in order to pick a quarrel.
fepha - similar to tlhdla [arcu], bewitch; injure by witchcraft; curse, as a woman striking the ground with her apron and calling down evil; go about among children indecently exposed, thus bringing evil upon them.
fepile - has fed.
fepisa - entice.
fepisitse - has helped to feed.
fepisitswe - has been helped to feed.
fera - make a hedge; hedge around.
fêra - bend a finger when counting; bend the leg.
ferea - sit crosslegged; make a proposal to; propose to fall in love; court; pay attention to.
ferekana - make a false statement; be false; be deceitful; be treacherous; be a turncoat.
ferekanêla - be untrue to; prove unfaithful or false to; turn against.
ferekanetse - has been untrue to; has proved false or unfaithful to.
ferekanetswe - has been deceived; has been lied to.
ferekanya - has caused to be untrue; make unfaithful or false.
ferekanye - has changed one's mind; has become unfaithful; has become spiritually disturbed.
fêrêlêla - frequent a place; has revolved | has spun; revolve, spin. | fereletse v.s.prr. < fêrêlêla, has frequented a. place; has revolved, has spun.. feresa v.s.simp., frequent a place; loiter.
feretlha - disturb; cause turmoil. | feretIhaka v.s. ext. disturb excessively; cause! much turmoil.
feretIhanya - be the source of turmoil; bring about confusion.
feretlhêga - be brought into a state of turmoil; be upset; be unsettled, as water that has been disturbed.
feretlhegile - has been brought into a state of turmoil; is unsettled, as troubled water.
feretlhwa - being confused; f being disturbed.
feroga - become stirred up; become: nauseous, as bile; feroga sebete means feel sick or squeamish; have a feeling of nausea; 1 be rolled, as eyes.
ferogaka - become very stirred up become nauseated, as by bile; roll the eyes incessantly or uncontrollably or excessively.
ferogana - roll eyes strangely; feel bilious.
ferogêla - roll the eyes.
ferogetse - has rolled the eyes.
ferogile - has rolled the eyes strangely.
ferola - make sick, or bilious; nauseate; roll, as eyes.
ferosa - cause to stir up, as bile; cause to roll, as eyes; nauseate; make abhorrent.
ferosiwa - being made bilious.
ferositse - has caused to stir up as bile; has caused to nauseate.
ferotsê - has stirred up, as bile; has rolled, as eyes.
ferotswê - has been rolled, as eyes, etc.; has been made bilious.
fesa - let a calf out at milking time.
fesediwa - (same as "fesetswa being let out"), as a calf at milking time.
fêS5ene - fashion [borrowed].
fesêtsa - let a calf out at milking time.
fesetswa - being let out, as a calf at milking time.
fesitse - has let a calf out at milking time.
fesitswe - has been let out, as a calf at milking time.
fesiwa - being let out, as a calf at milking time.
feta - pass; pass on; pass by; pass away; surpass.
fetafetana - vary in length.
fetaka - go to and fro; pass; going one way or another.
fetana - surpass each other.
fetanye - have passed each other; have surpassed each other.
fetareêkoo - occiput; back of the head.
fetêga - passable, become passable.
fetêla - move on to.
fetêlêla - pass and go beyond; overtake.
feteletse - has passed and gone beyond; has overtaken.
fetêlwa - abort.
fetetsa - spread, as an epidemic.
fetetse - has passed on to.
fetetswe - has miscarried; has been passed on to.
fetile - has gone past; has overtaken.
fetisa - cause or help to pass on.
fetisana - pass a thing to one another; help one another to go past some hurdle.
fetisetsa - cause to pass on for.
fetisitse - has caused to pass on.
fetisiwa - being caused or helped to go beyond; being made to pass.
fetiwa - being surpassed by.
fêtlha - to kindle a fire, or to stir when cooking a meal; to churn.
fêtlhaka - êtlhamolelê ww. pur, start a fire by the friction of sticks in a traditional way.
fêtlhêga - become stirred, etc.; be well mixed, as with water and meal in making soft porridge. 1.
fêtihêla - stir into.
fêtlhêlwa - being stirred for.
fetlhisa - cause or help to stir.
fetlhisiwa - being helped to stir; being caused to stir.
fetlhiwa - (same as "fêtlhwa"), being rubbed; being bored through, as wood by weevils; being churned.
fêtlhwa - being stirred.
fetoga - become changed; be changed or altered as one's mind; relent.
fetogana - change about; wriggle like a worm.
fetogêla - turn against; be against.
fetogile - has changed; has altered one's mind; has relented.
fetola - change by being the catalyst; answer a question, speech, etc.; reply to a letter; turn around, over or about; alter.
fetolaka - reply anyhow; reply ina disrespectful manner; change about much.
fetolana - quarrel.
fetolanye - have replied one another; have quarrelled.
fetolêla - turn inside out, as a garment; reply; turn.
fetolêlwa - being turned inside out; being turned; replied to, answered.
fetolwa - being replied to; being remodelled.
fetosa - send back.
fetosiwa - being returned; being turned back.
fetotsê - has changed; has replied to.
fetotswê - is changed; was replied to.
fetsa - finish; complete; fulfil; put an end to.
fetsana - as families or armies.
fetwa - being passed by, hence a spinster is referred to as lefetwa; being exceeded.
fi - Utter darkness; instant darkness.
fidika - (same as "pitika"), roll a thing; roll a thing over.
fidikêga - be rolled over; capable of being rolled.
fidikêla - roll a thing.
fidikile - has rolled a thing.
fidikologa - become rolled away, OF over.
fidikologile - has become rolled away or over.
fidikolola - roll away; roll back.
fidikolotsê - has rolled away.
fidikolotswê - has been rolled away.
fifadiwa - being made to become dark; being darkened.
fifala - become dark; in the process of being eclipsed.
fifatsa - cause to become dark.
fifetse - has become dark.
figitlhantsê - has crushed in the hand; has crushed under.
figitIhanya - crush in the hand or under foot; destroy by crushing.
figitlheditse - has crushed by rubbing vigorously.
figitIhetsa - crush in the hand; crush by rubbing.
fii - exclamation for blackness.
fika - (same as "lefika"), a rock.
file - has given.
filimi - (FoR, film.
filwe - has been given.
fina - take anything between the finger and the thumb; take a pinch of snuff; pinch.
finnê - has taken a pinch of snuff.
finwa_ - as a pinch of snuff.
fipha - fill to the brim; pile food into a pot.
fiphile - has filled to the brim, as a pot filled with food.
fisa - borrow.
fisa - burn; set alight.
fisaka - burn a lot of things; be preoccupied with burning things.
fisana - burn each other; inconvenience each other, as plants that are overcrowded.
fisediwa - being burnt, to the detriment of.
fisêga - become burnt; have an urge. APPL. OF fisa, burn for. N. CL.99-, SING. OF difisioterapi [borrowed], i, physiotherapy. NT. < Sa AND V.S.CAUS. < fisa, cause to nt; be very hot. FT. < fisa, has burnt; has heated..PASS. < fisitse, has been burnt. ASS. < fisa, being burnt. IMP., arrive; arrive at; reach to. ip., hide; conceal; bury. xT., conceal, just about everything; be hiding things. S. EXT, Same as gorosaka, atrive, as ests; have many arriving. v.s.REC. < fitlhêla, arrive one after the rrive in succession. v.s. PFT. < fitlhêlana, have arrived, er the other; have arrived tively. s. REC. < fitlhêla, conceal from one; hide from one another. v.s. PFT. < fitlhêlana, have concealed e another; have hidden from one NEUT, be hidden; become hidden; be.S. PFT. < fitlhêga, is hidden; has hidden; is well hidden.. APPL., hide for; bury for; conceal for.. APPL, find; discover; overtake..S.DER. < fitlha, be mixed up with; s.pass. < fitlhêla, being found; being red; being overtaken; overtaken. s.pass. < fitlhêla, being buried; being from. s. PFT. < fitlhêla, has found at; has red. Ss. PFT. < fitlhêla, has hidden for; has for. PFT., Same as gorogile, has arrived. prr., has hidden; has buried. s.Pass. < fitlhile, has been buried; has dden, or concealed. s.PASS. < fitlhile, has been lished; lit., has been arrived. CAUS. < gorosa, cause or help to ake (something) safely to. caus., cause or help to hide; cause or ury, the dead..S. APPL. OF fitlhisa, cause or help to ring to. v.s.Pass. < fitlhisetsa, being caused made to arrive. s.pFT. < fitlhisa, has helped to hide, S.PFT. < fitlhisa, same as gorositse, e to arrive at; has brought to.
fitlhisitswe - has been helped to bury; has been made to conceal.
fitlhisitswe - (same as "gorositswe"), has been brought; has been made to arrive.
fitlhisiwa - (same as "fitlhiswa being caused or helped to bury"),; being accused of hiding something, i.e. accused of stealing.
fitlhisiwa - (same as "fitlhiswa and goroswa"), being made to arrive; being welcomed.
fitlhiswa - (same as "fitlhisiwa being caused to bury").
fitlhola - eat breakfast.
fitlhotswê - has been having breakfast.
fitlhwa - (same as "fitlhiwa"), being buried; being hidden.
fitIhwa - (same as "fitlhiwa"), being arrived.
fiwa - being given, as food or a gift.
foafoa - (DJ, go about in an angry manner.
foafoegile - has gone about in an excited manner.
fodile - is healed; is well after sickness; has become cool, of a hot substance; has threshed corn; has harvested; has harvested much; has queued; has lined up.
fodisetsa - cause to heal; cause to cool, of a hot substance, for or on behalf of.
fodisitse - has healed; has caused to heal; has caused to cool, of a hot substance.
fodisitswe - has been healed; has been made to cool down.
fodisiwa - being made to heal; being given medical treatment; being cured.
fofa - fly.
fofa fofa - fly a little; fail to settle down; move from pillar to post.
fofaka - be constantly on the wing; fly extensively.
fofêla - rush into, as into a fight; put on new clothing without any inhibition; dress smartly.
fofêlana - rush joyfully to greet each other; rush in to fight one another.
fofetse - has flown to; has rushed into doing; is smartly dressed.
fofetswe - flying has been done; has been flown.
fofile - has flown.
fofilwe - has been flown.
fofisa - cause or help to fly.
fofisitse - has caused or helped to fly.
fofisitswe - has been caused or helped to fly.
fofiwa - flying, being done; being flown.
fofoditse - has killed a weak or helpless animal.
fofoma - similar to phophoma, be full as the heart; yearn; become full, as a rising river.
fofomêla - as a rising river threatening to overflow its banks; yearn for.
fofometse - has filled, as a rising river; has yearned to.
fofomile - has filled; has yearned.
fofomisa - as a river; make to prosper.
fofomisitse - has caused or helped to fill; has made to yearn.
fofomoga - rise up in bulk, or increase as water in a river.
fofomogêla - similar to reisetsa, rise up.
fofomogile - has risen, or increased, as water in a river.
fofonyeditse - has whispered.
fofonyetsa - similar to sebetsa, whisper; tell a thing secretly.
fofora - brush off, or rub off, as dust off a person.
foforaka - brush off, as dust off a person.
foforêga - break off in small pieces; loosen, as particles of rock from a boulder; fall, as rain in drops; drizzle; flake off.
foforegile - has broken off in small pieces; has come off loose, as particles from a boulder; has flaked off.
foforêla - empty the remaining bits of corn or cornflour into another's container; help with or give the little that remains to.
foforetse - has brushed off; has dusted off.
foforile - has brushed off; has fallen as drizzling rain.
foforisa - cause or help to brush off, or tub off, as dust.
foforiwa - being brushed off.
fofotsa - kill a weak or helpless animal.
fofuditse - (same as "foufaditse"), has blinded.
fofufala - (same as "foufala become blind").
fofufatsa - (same as "foufatsa"), make blind.
fofufetse - (same as "foufetse"), is blind.
fofufologa - same as foufologa, state of recovering sight; recover sight.
fofufolola - (same as "foufolola"), cause to recover sight.
foka - blow, as the wind; wave to and fro; wave backwards and forwards; fan; dispense healing by waving to and fro.
fokêla - wave to and fro for.
fokêlêla - smell.
fokile - as the wind; has waved to and fro.
fokisa - cause or make wind to blow. 1p. EXPR, go iphokisa phefo, take a stroll.
fokisetsa - blow, as the wind.
fokisitse - has caused wind to blow.
fokiwa - (same as "fokwa"), being blown over; being fanned.
fokoditse - has subtracted; has diminished or reduced.
fokodiwa - being diminished ete.
fokêla - be deficient.
fokola - become very weak; is weak.
fokoleditse - has diminished; has subtracted; has minimised problems for.
fokoleditswe - has been subtracted for; has been diminished, or minimised for, as problems.
fokoletsa - diminish for; subtract; minimise problems for someone; give a part for.
fokotsa - diminish anything solid; substract; lessen.
fokotsêga - become diminished; become less.
fokotsêgile - has become less; has become diminished, in quantity or severity.
fokwa - being aired; being subjected to curative treatment consisting of a wand waved to and fro over one.
fokwana - a kind of shrub.
fokwê - one ostrich.
fola - heal, or become healed; recuperate; cool. fola_v.s. sIMP. [borrowed], queue; line up.
fola - surround; encircle; encompass {ARcH, thresh corn or maize, while sitting round the heap, or using horses or cattle; harvest; reap much harvest.
folaga - a flag.
folaseke - [ror|, flask.
foleiki - mouth organ.
folêkê - (FoR), Stain.
foleimatšhine - flying machine; aircraft [borrowed].
folêla - queue for; line up for.
folene - {Fror), flannel.
folêrê - sina. oF difolêrê ror}, flared.
foletse - has lined up for; is lined up for.
folodisa - cause to abort (used of animals).
folodisitse - has caused to abort.
folodisitswe - has been caused to abort.
folodisiwa - same.as folodiswa being caused to abort.
foloditse - has aborted.
fologa - descend; alight; arrive by public conveyanice.
fologêla - descend to; come down to.
fologêlêla - descend down a steep incline; incline steeply towards.
fologeletse - has descended to.
fologetse - has alighted; has gone down.
fologisa - cause or help to descend.
fologisiwa - similar to foloswa being caused to descend; being made to alight.
fologiwa - (same as "fologwa being descended"),; being alighted from.
fologwa - (same as "fologiwa being descended"),; being alighted from.
folola - as beads from string berries or beans from a pod; unstring beads.
fololêla - string beads; put or push one thing through another; thread a needle.
fololetse - has strung beads together; has put or pushed one thing through another; has threaded a sewing needle.
fololetswe - has been strung together; has been threaded, as a sewing needle.
folosa - cause to come down, or descend; let down.
foloseditse - has caused to bring down; has caused to come down.
folosetsa - bring down, as goods from a vehicle; let down to.
folosetswa - (same as "folosediwa"), being brought down; unload.
folosisa - cause to bring down; cause to alight.
folositse - has brought down; has made to alight.
folosiwa - being brought down; being made to alight.
folotsa - abort (used of animals).
folotse - gathered, as beads from a string, beans from a pod.
fêlwa - cured; being calmed down being cooled.
folwa - being threshed, or harvested, as corn, etc.
fêma - similar to logetsa, lubricate; grease; prepare arrow by rubbing with poison, or a spear by rubbing with fat.
fomilwe - has been lubricated.
fomodisa - cause to rest.
fomodisitse - (same as "phomodisitse"), has caused to rest.
fomoditse - (same as "phomoditse"), has refreshed.
fomoga - (same as "phomoga"), be rested from work; be refreshed.
fomogile - (same as "phomogile has rested from work"),; has refreshed.
fomola - (same as "phomola"), rest from work for a while; be refreshed.
fomotsa - (same as "phomotsa refresh one after work"),; cause to rest from.
fomotsê - (same as "phomotsê has rested from work"),; has refreshed after work. fong DIAL. vAR. foo, at that time; just then; at that moment.
fongwa - being greased; being lubricated; being made poisonous, said of an arrow.
foo - AND Conj, similar to fong, there; where you are; where; at that moment.
fopha - strike or smite with the open hand or with some object.
fophêga - be strikeable; capable of being smitten with an open hand.
fophegile - was struck, was smitten hard with an open hand or object.
fophêla - hit, or strike.
fophetse - has hit, or struck with an open hand because.
fophile - has hit, or struck with an open hand.
fophola - grope or search in the dark for something.
fopholeditse - has groped about, in search of a thing; has made wild guesses.
fopholêsêga - be searchable; be possible to guess at.
fopholesegile - was searchable; was possible to guess at.
fopholetsa - feel about for; grope for in the dark; guess at; take a chance; chance it.
fophotsê - has groped in the dark; has made wild guesses. Fora N.CL.1A9- [borrowed], France.
fora - cheat by not fulfilling a promise; deceive by promising and not performing; deceive by lying; tell a lie to.
fora - dress or curl the hair.
foraga - +v.s,a load of sand or wood, etc.; to obtain a load of.
foragile - has secured a good load.
foraka - deceive or lie to another.
forana - deceive or lie to one another.
forêga - be puffed up with vanity; think a great deal of oneself; be duped.
foregile - has been puffed up with vanity; has been duped.
foretse - has deceived.
forile - has deceived; has lied.
forilwe - has been deceived; has been hoaxed or duped.
forisa - or hoax or dupe.
forisiwa - being helped or caused to deceive, etc.
foritšhe - (For.],same as setsidifatsi, refrigerator.
foriwa - duped, hoaxed or lied to.
foro - ditch. fêrdka_v.s. simp., be of no use or profit; put one at a disadvantage.
forokile - has put one at a disadvantage has cheated.
fôrôk6 - (For), fork.
forekwa - being missed.
fordla - anoint or massage with perfumes and cosmetics; anoint or massage a sick person with the contents of the stomach of a sacrificial animal; rub dirt off the body.
forêlêga - become rubbed to remove dirt.
forêlwa - so as to remove dirt. forêma _v.s. sip. [borrowed], be in charge; mould bricks.
forêmane - AND 9N-, and difêrêmane ror), foreman; supervisor.
fordmêla - mould bricks for; supervise on behalf of.
forometse - has moulded | bricks for. | foroseditse v.s.prr. < forosetsa, has poured out | grain, etc. carelessly. | forosêla v.s. simp.,run out or in, freely, as sand into a hole, or grain from a sack; trickle from a sack; trickle down, as grain.
foroselaga - ¢-, (For), the forepart of a whip; the lash.
forosetsa - etc. carelessly; squander.
forosetse - has poured out grain, etc. slowly.
forotse - has anointed with perfumes, or cosmetics; has rubbed a patient's body with the contents of the stomach of a sacrificed animal, being a ceremonial cleansing.
fosa - misbehave; fail in one's aim; miss; fail in one's purpose; make a mistake; blunder.
fosagala - become mistaken; go wrong completely.
fosagetse - has become mistaken.
fosaka - fail frequently.
fosana - keep missing each other narrowly.
fosêga - become mistaken; go wrong; be capable of going wrong.
fosegile - has become mistaken; has gone wrong; has misfired.
fosetsa - make a mistake at someone else's expense.
fosisa - lead into committing a blunder; cause or make to misfire.
fosisiwa - being lead astray; being misled.
fositse - has missed the aim; has made a mistake; has misfired.
fosiwa - being missed; being mistaken.
fosofaite - phosphate [borrowed].
fosoforo - phosphorus [borrowed].
fošwa - (same as "fosiwa"), being missed; being mistaken.
fošwa - (same as "fofiwa"), flying.
fotlha - strip off leaves, or small branches; harass while out in the open, by rain or wind; to be exposed to, suffer exposure to the elements.
fotIhagana - (DJ, keep abreast of.
fotlhaganye - has kept abreast of.
fotIhaka - strip off leaves or small branches extensively.
fotIhakwa - (same as "fotlhakiwa"), being stripped, as leaves or small branches; being subjected to extreme suffering, as when exposed to wind or rain.
fotlhêga - be easily stripped of leaves or small branches; be destitute.
fotlhegile - has become stripped bare of leaves or branches.
fotlhêla - strip off leaves with the hand or by other means for; harass.
fotlhetse - has stripped bare for, etc.; has reprimanded for.
fotlhile - has stripped bare, as trees; has reprimanded severely.
fotlIhisa - etc.
fotlhiwa - (same as "fotlhwa"), be stripped bare of leaves or vegetation.
fotosetata - dira miriti, photostat.
fotosintese - photosynthesis [borrowed].
fotsê - has queued; has lined up.
fotse - is healed; has cooled.
fotswe - has been healed; recovery has been achieved.
foufaditse - has blinded.
foufaditswe - has been blinded.
foufadiwa - being blinded.
foufalaka - be plagued by blindness, in a community.
foufalakwa - being plagued by blindness.
foufalêla - become blind.
foufaletse - has become blind.
foufatsa - make blind.
foufatswa - (same as "foufadiwa"), being blinded.
foufetse - is blind; has become blind.
foufetswe - is/was blinded.
foufologa - state of recovering sight; recover sight.
foufologile - has recovered sight.
foufolola - cause to recover sight.
foufololwa - being given back one's sight; being caused to recover sight.
foufolotsê - has made to recover sight.
foufolotswê - has been made to recover sight.
foud - + CONJ., DIAL. VAR. fao, which is more widely used.
fuba - become dwarfed as a person animal or plant.
fudile - has grazed; has plucked fruit, etc.; has fired a gun; has shot at; has sped by in a vehicle or any other mode of transport.
fudisa - cause to graze; herd grazing domestic animals; cause or help to shoot a gun, or bow and arrow.
fudua - stir up; agitate; trouble; row a boat.
fuduaka - agitate much; give much trouble.
fuduana - stir each other into causing trouble; incite each other to cause trouble.
fuduêga - be agitated; become stirred up.
fuduêgêla - êga, be agitated for; become stirred up for.
fuduegetse - has agitated; has stirred up.
fuduegile - is agitated; is stirred up; is troubled; is incited.
fuduêla - row a boat; stir up, incite; has incited.
fuduetse - has stirred up for etc.
fuduga - remove one's abode; depart; migrate.
fudugêla - remove one's abode; depart; migrate to.
fudugetse - has removed one's abode; has departed; has migrated.
fudugile - has migrated; has moved to.
fudugwa - being moved to; being migrated.
fuduile - has incited or roused.
fuduilwe - has incited or roused.
fuduisitse - has caused or helped to stir or incite.
fuduisiwa - being caused or helped to stir or incite.
fuduiwa - as a boat; being incited or stirred up.
fudula - flush from a hiding place; expel; banish from home.
fudusa - cause or help to remove one's abode to a new site.
fuduseditse - has caused to move one's residence from one location to a new one.
fudusediwa - being caused to resettle.
fudusetsa - cause to have one's abode removed to a new site.
fudusitse - has caused an abode to be removed to a new site.
fudusiwa - being caused to remove one's abode; being resettled; being caused to move.
fudutse - has expelled; has banished from home.
fudutsha - (same as "fudusa cause or help to remove one's abode to a new site").
fudutsheditse - (same as "fuduseditse"), has caused to resettle.
fudutshediwa - (same as "fudusediwa"), being caused to resettle.
fudutshetsa - (same as "fudusediwa"), being caused to resettle.
fudutshitse - (same as "fudusitse"), has caused an abode to be removed to a new site.
fudutshiwa - (same as "fudusiwa"), being caused to remove one's abode.
fufa - envy, be jealous.
fufana - envy one another; rival each other; be jealous of each other.
fufantsê - has made jealous of each other. 7.
fufantsha - make each other jealous.
fufantshitse - (same as "fufantsê").
fufanya - (same as "fufantsha").
fufanyeditse - has caused others to be jealous of one another.
fufanyediwa - being caused to be jealous of one another.
fufanyetsa - stir up jealousy or quarrels.
fufêga - be jealous; be envious.
fufêgêla - êga, feel jealous.
fufegetse - has felt jealous.
fufegile - is, or was jealous; was envious.
fufudi - sweating heat.
fufudisa - cause to perspire; cause to be angry, or annoyed; boil meat, milk, etc.
fufudisitse - (same as "fufuditse has caused to perspire or to be angry"),; has helped to kill a weak or helpless animal.
fufudisiwa - being caused to boil, as milk, meat, etc.:.
fufuditse - (same as "fufudisitse has caused to perspire or to be angry").
fufudiwa - (same as "fufudisiwa being boiled"), as milk, meat; being killed, as a weak or helpless animal.
fufula - cook, as meat being boiled; foam; scum; show signs of being a profitable business venture.
fufulaka - perspire heavily; perspire easily.
fufulêla - toil hard. 1p. Expr. go ja mofufutso wa phatla, to deserve what one obtains.
fufuletse - has perspired.
fufuletswe - has been perspired.
fufutse - has perspired; has foamed.
fula - shoot.
fula - pluck, as fruits from a tree; graze.
fulaka - graze much; shoot much.
fulana - fire a gun, etc. at each other.
fulara - to turn one's back on; to go away and not return again; to die (said mainly of very old people).
fularêla - turn one's back on someone; desert another.
fularêlana - face in opposite directions; turn away from one another.
fularetse - has turned away from; has turned one's back upon; has deserted.
fulatsha - (same as "fularisa cause to turn away").
fulatshitse - (same as "fularisitse has caused to turn away").
fulêga - be capable of being shot; be shot.
fulêga - be capable of being grazed; be grazed.
fulêla - graze at or for.
fulêla - shoot at or for.
fulere - has turned one's back on.
fura - gnaw; chew hard food; chew maize, as a horse; chew berries.
fureditse - |, has hurled.
furetsa - [D.], hurl.
furr - ip., of throwing far.
furu_ - hay [borrowed].
furumê - %-, fodder [borrowed].
fusa - dry up, of a cow or milk goat; begin to drive away the calf, as a cow in calf.
fusetsa - dry up, or cease to give milk.
futêga - be capable of being put in the mouth all at once.
futêla - fill the mouth with.
futile - has stuffed one's mouth.
futisa - cause to stuff one's mouth.
futisitse - has caused or made to put in the mouth all at once.
futisiwa - being caused to put in the mouth all at once.
futiwa - being stuffed in the mouth.
futswê - has been grazed by; has been plucked.
futswêla - stir food into which liquid has been poured; blow, induce a flame in a fire.
futswetse - has stirred food into which liquid has been poured; has blown, to induce a flame in a fire.
