ga - ya ga mang, whose is it? ga mang at whose (place)?.
ga Loc - ke ya go malomê, I am going to my uncle's place; o tswa ga Modubu, he comes from Modubv's (place). ga NEG. FoRM., not, ga ke ênê, I am not him; ga se ênê, it is not he. FORMATIVE OF CARDINAL NUMERATION, ADV., gone OF gantsi, many times; gararo, three times.
ga - as in ga me, my and mine (thing); ga gago, your and yours; ga gagwe; his and hers; ya ga malomê, of (possessed by) uncle.
ga - as the pass. < twe, in ga twe, it is/was said; other v.s. pass. as in ga jewa, ga nowa, eating was done, drinking was done. Note that other v.s,when preceded by ga remain in their simp. FoRM.,ga tla motho, there came a man, i.e. the action happened in the past.
ga - draw, or fetch, as water or some other liquid; gather greens, such as beans, peas, leafy vegetables.
ga bonê apv - PHR, same as gaabê, signifies place at their place; at (their) home.
ga-e-gane - PHR, it isn't surprising; no wonder.
ga gabo - pur, of (their) home; at (their) home; their home; his home.
ga go na - pur, there isn't; it is the negative of go na le, there is; it may or may not take an object complement. ga kae per apv., how often; how many times.
ga me - PHR, my; mine; of mine. Qualifies words of CL.15,go, as in go bua ga me, my speaking.
ga se NEG - PHR lit., it is not as in ga se gdnê, it is not so.
ga twe v - PHR.THEV.S, re, it is being said; it is alleged.
gaabo apv.Loc - pHR, at their (place); at their home.
gaaka - draw, or fetch large amounts of water, etc.
gaba - hollow out; scoop out; hew out; cut out, as an engraver.
gabaduka - hollow out and devour, as a melon.
gabadukile - hollowed out, as a melon.
gabagabêga - feel very hungry.
gabaka - hollow out, etc., a lot.
gabaladitse - has caused to stoop forward.
gabalala - be thin or slender, as one who is starving; walk at a fast pace, so that one's body stoops or inclines forward.
gabalatsa - cause to be thin or slender; cause to walk with a stoop.
gabaletse - is thin and slender.
gabana - hurt each other with sharp instruments. Gabane n.ct.1A-,a village (to the west of Gaborone).
gabea - chase about; harass; bewitch; make mad through witchcraft. gabedi Apv. oF MAN, twice.
gabêga - can be scooped out; become scooped well.
gabegile - has been scooped.
gabêla - scoop out for etc.
gabêlwa - being hollowed out for.
gabêtlêlêla - cut into slices or strips.
gabetleletse - has cut into slices or strips.
gabetsa - eat quickly or greedily.
gabetse - scooped out for; hurrying for.
gabetswe - has been scooped out on behalf of someone else. gabo inreru., of taking a mouthful of a drink.
gabê - s., express relationship; belonging to them; of their family, clan or group.
gaboga - be drinkable in gulps as liquid or thin porridge; be quaffed; be drained in large draughts.
gabola - drink or drain in gulps; quaff.
gabuka - kill off large numbers of game or people.
gabukêga - die off in large numbers; be finished off.
gabukegile - have died off in large numbers.
gabukile - has killed off large numbers.
gabura - gnaw.
gabura - etc. as a lion; eat the insides of a thing.
gaburile - has devoured bones etc. as a lion; has eaten the inside of a thing.
gabutsa - cause to devour.
gabutsêga - be edible.
gadi - sur, denotes female gender, or disposition pertaining to femininity; kgosigadi, chieftainness; denotes extra large, or very evil; Jeotogadi, extra large foot; moloigadi, a most notorious witch. gadi inrerJ., look aside suddenly; take a glimpse of; flash suddenly, like lightning.
gadika - roast; melt fat; cause abdominal pain; fry; annoy or poke; subject to abuse.
gadikaka - fry a lot; subject to much abuse.
gadikana - have a standing grudge against each other; joke easily, as co-wives.
gadikanya - cause to annoy one another; cause to inconvenience each other.
gadikanye - have greatly inconvenienced each other.
gadikêga - become well fried; be well browned, as meat being fried.
gadikegile - has become well fried.
gadikwa - have abdominal pain; have colic.
gadile - has screamed; has cried aloud; has shouted.
gadima - look behind; flash, as lightning.
gadimana - «Ec., turn to look at each other.
gadimanye - have kept turning to look at each other.
gadimêga - be able to turn back and take a look.
gadimela - look back for.
gadimisa - cause or help to look back; cause to look sideways; cause a light to be flashed.
gadimisitse - has caused to look sideways; has caused a light to be flashed.
gadimisitswe - has been caused to look sideways or backwards.
gadimisiwa - being made to look sideways, or to turn backwards.
gadimologa - turn to look forward; turn to face forward.
-gadimolola - be made to turn and look forward.
gadimolosa - cause to stop looking backward; be made to look forward.
gadimolositse - has been made to stop looking, or facing backwards.
gadimolosiwa - being made to look, or face forward by.
gadimolwa - be cooled by exposure to air as hot soft porridge.
gadimosa - cause to look sideways; cause a light to be flashed.
gae - similar to legae, home of; home.
gaeaga - a shout meant to stimulate a person to run fast; off you go!.
gaetsho - PHR, at (our) home; at (my) home; lit., at that which belongs to us.
gafa - (same as "efosa"), ward off with the hand.
gafetsa - push towards.
gagaba - (same as "gogoba"), creep or crawl on hands and knees; crawl, as a cat hunting.
gagabaka - (same as "gogobaka"), crawl about; crawl actively; behave stealthily and suspiciously.
gagabêla - (same as "gogobêla"), crawl towards; be on the verge of catching up with.
gagabile - (same as "gogobile"), has crawled; has crept.
gagabisa - (same as "gogobisa"), cause or help to crawl or creep.
gagabisitse - (same as "gogobisitse"), has caused to crawl or creep.
gagabisiwa - (same as "gogobisiwa and gogobiswa"), being caused to creep; being caused to crawl.
gagabiwa - being made to creep over.
gagamaditse - has caused to stretch or pull; has made taut.
gagamaditswe - has been made to stretch, etc.
gagamadiwa - being stretched tight by; being tightly drawn.
gagamala - be tightly drawn; become stretched or pulled; be active in pursuit of a purpose; cease for a while, as rain.
gagamalêla - begin and continue to stretch tight for; be in the process of ceasing for a while, as rain; be tightly stretched for.
gagamaletse - continue to stretch tight; be actively pursuing something; be hastening to; have ceased for a while.
gagamatsa - tighten, stretch to make tight; cease to rain; tighten up the law, or control of; make taut.
gagametse - be stretched tight; has ceased for a while as rain; is tightly stretched.
gagamologa - (same as "rêpa"), become slack.
gagamologile - has become slack.
gagamolola - Slacken; loosen the grip.
gagapaka - extort a lot; take much more than one has the right to, or permission to.
gagapana - «c, forcibly taken from each other; extract from one another.
gagapêla - extort for; take much more than one has the right to, or permission to.
gagapile - has commandeered.
gagapiwa - being subjected to extortion.
gagara - < gogorupa is more frequently used; grasp all; attempt to get the lion's share, as a greedy child.
gagarile - gogorupile, has unfairly taken all.
gagautlha - literally or figuratively tear in pieces ravenously; assault; attack fiercely; knock or pull about; set upon.
gagautlhaka - tear in pieces ravenously; assault very fiercely.
gagautlhana - tear each other to pieces; assault, or attack each other; argue savagely.
gagautlhêga - be torn to pieces; be assaulted, or attacked fiercely.
gagautlhêgile - is torn to pieces ravenously, etc.
gagautlhile - has torn to pieces ravenously; has assaulted, or attacked fiercely.
gagautlhwa - (same as "gagautlhiwa"), being torn in pieces ravenously; being assaulted, or attacked fiercely.
gago - tear suddenly and unexpectedly, as garment.
gago - refers to 2ND PERS. SING. your/yours.
gagodisa - help or cause to tear.
gagodisitse - has caused to tear.
gagodisiwa - being caused to tear.
gagoga - be torn; become torn.
gagogaka - tear extensively; tear easily.
gagogana - tear into pieces.
gagogantsê - has torn into pieces.
gagogantswê - has been torn into pieces. gagoganya_v.S.CAUS., cause to tear into pieces.
gagogêla - tear for.
gagogêlwa - being dressed in tattered clothes; being unable to replace one's tattered clothes.
gagogile - has become torn; is torn.
gagogiwa - being torn (said of garment); becoming torn.
gagola - tear.
gagolaka - tear anything and everything; buy large amounts of dress material.
gagolêga - be torn; tear easily; capable of being torn.
gagolêlwa - being torn for, i.e. being impoverished, or left with old and poor quality clothing.
gagwê - S.3RD PERS. SING. his; hers; see tab. p. XX.
gai pri - kill a large number instantly.
gaila - kill a large number; slaughter, as people; grind sorghum into a coarse meal.
gailaka - kill very large numbers; kill ruthlessly and mercilessly.
gailana - kill large numbers of each other's group.
gailêga - be dying in large numbers; be killed in large numbers.
gailegile - are killed in large numbers; have died in large numbers.
gailêla - make die in large numbers for; grind sorghum coarsely for.
gailêlwa - being made to die in large numbers for; being exterminated for.
gailwa - being made to die in large numbers.
gaisa - excel; exceed; succeed better than others; surpass; be of more value than; go beyond, even in a bad sense.
gaisaka - excel, succeed better than others, frequently and easily. a gaisana Vv.s. REC, compete against each other.
gaise - a big thatched house; dwelling house with more than one room [borrowed].
gaisediwa - being outdone; being surpassed.
gaisêga - be exceeded, be surpassed.
gaisegile - has been exceeded; has been outdone.
gaisetsa - excel for, at or in.
gaisisa - cause to be surpassed.
gaisitse - has excelled.
gaisitswe - has been exceeded.
gaisiwa - < being excelled or exceeded.
gaitsê - has killed a large number.
gaitswê - have been killed in large numbers.
gaka - escape one's memory; forget; make difficult to remember.
gakadiwa - being made indignant, or angry; being made zealous, or a earnest.
gakala - be indignant, or angry; be zealous, or earnest. gakalaka_v.s.exr., become indignant, or angry easily or often.
gakalêla - be angry with; be determined to.
gakalêlana - be angry with one another.
gakanya - disguise; kill game in large quantities.
gakatsa - cause, or help to become angry or indignant or adamant; incite to anger; provoke.
gakatsaka - incite to anger or provoke frequently or easily.
gakatsana - provoke one another; incite each other.
gakatsêga - be provoked; be incited to anger; be indignant.
gakatsegile - has become provoked; has become excited.
gakêga - be forgotten; forgettable; apt to slip from memory.
gakegile - has been forgotten; has slipped from memory.
gakêla - (same as "gatsêla"), freeze; congeal; forget for.
gaketse - is angry or indignant; is adamant; is at the height of, as rain falling.
gakgamaditse - has surprised; has perplexed.
gakgamadiwa - (same as "gakgamatswa"), being surprised; being amazed.
gakgamala - wonder; be surprised; be astonished.
gakgamalêla - be surprised by; be amazed at.
gakgamaletse - is surprised by; is amazed at.
gakgamatsa - cause to wonder; be astonished or surprised.
gakgametse - is surprised or astonished.
gakilwe - has forgotten.
gakisa - disguise; make forget.
gakisitse - has disguised; has made to forget.
gakisitswe - has been made to forget.
gakisiwa - being made to forget.
gakiwa - being forgotten; not being remembered.
gakologa - melt; become melted, as hail, ice or a metal.
gakologêla - melt for; become melted for, as hail or iron.
gakologêlwa - being remembered; be recollected.
gakologetswe - has remembered; has come to mind.
gakologile - has melted.
gakolola - remind, remind of; counsel; advise.
gakololana - remind one another; consult together; advise each other.
gakololanye - have reminded one another; have consulted together.
gakololwa - being reminded; being advised.
gakolosa - cause to melt; melt, as lead; warm up cooked food.
gakoloseditse - has melted for; has warmed food for.
gakoloseditswe - has been warmed up for.
gakolosediwa - being warmed up for.
gakolosetsa - warming food up for.
gakolosisa - cause or help to melt, or warm food.
gakolositse - has made something melt; has melted, as lead.
gakolositswe - has been melted; has been warmed up, as food.
gakwa - (same as "gakiwa"), being forgotten.
gala - gall.
gala - bile; fever; biliousness.
gala - scream; cry aloud; shout; ward off.
galagadile - has screamed cried aloud or shouted loudly.
galagala - scream loudly; cried loudly.
galaka - be bitter; be brackish, said of water; be painful, as an eye with something in it.
galakaka - be extremely bitter, or brackish, said of water; be very painful, as an eye with something foreign in it.
galakêga - become bitter; become angry; be pained.
galakegile - has become bitter; has become angry.
galakisa - make bitter; provoke to bitterness or anger.
galakisitse - has caused bitterness; has made bitter.
galakisitswe - has been made bitter, etc.
galakisiwa - being made bitter.
galakiwa - being bitter, or brackish.
galala - refuse to accept, or accept grudgingly; grumble at a thing offered. Galalea N.cL.1Ao-, SING. OF boGalalea, Galilee.
galaleditse - has made to shine; has glorified.
galaleditswe - has been glorified by; has been made to shine by.
galalêla - shine; glare; glitter; be glorious; be transparent.
galalêlêla - êla, shine for; glare for; glitter for.
galaletsa - make shine, or glitter; praise; cause to appear glorious; glorify.
galaletse - has shone, or glittered.
galalwa - being refused, or acccepted grudgingly because of the quantity or character of the thing offered.
galaotêga - talk excitedly; be excited; blast forth, as the sound of a trumpet.
galaotêgêla - be excited by; rave about.
galaotegetse - was excited by. Plsuiesile V.S.PFT. < galaotêga, was excited; has talked wildly or furiously.
galaotegisa - excite; cause to rave.
galaotegiwa - being raved about.
galase - glass. galê apv.,of time, formerly; always; early. Often used as CON.ORADV.S. With PREF. like ka-, le-, sa-, etc [borrowed].
galefa - become angry; get annoyed.
galefaka - be very angry, be shorttempered.
galefatsa - make angry.
galefêla - be angry with; scold.
galefêlana - galefêla, be angry with each other; quarrel.
galefetsê - is angry with; was angry with.
galefetswe - is being angry with.
galefile - is in an angry state; is furious.
galefisa - anger; annoy; make angry; cause one to scold, or quarrel; fertilise.
galefisitse - has made angry; has caused to quarrel.
galefisiwa - being made angry.
galetse - has refused or grumbled at the thing offered.
galetsha - (same as "galefisa cause to be angry"),; to offend; to annoy.
galetshitse - (same as "galefisitse has caused to be angry"), or to be offended.
galodisa - give medicine to a dog, to make it fierce.
galodisitse - has given medicine to a dog to make it fierce.
galolêga - êga, roar angrily.
gama - milk; to press out the contents of the bowel, or pus from a sore.
gamakêla - swell, as after a snake's bite.
gamaketse - has swollen.
gamarêga - pause in doubt; become perplexed or surprised; cease from action, for a while, as one not knowing what to do.
gamaregile - is in doubt; is perplexed, or surprised.
gamaregisa - make to pause in doubt; to perplex; surprise.
gamaregisiwa - being made to pause in doubt; being left puzzled by.
gamaregiwa - being puzzled or surprised.
gamêga - be ina condition to be milked, as a lactating cow.
gamêla - or press out the contents of the bowel for.
gamêlêla - squeeze a liquid into, as lubricant into a sore ear; be rich in something, as honeycomb is rich in honey.
gameletse - has squeezed a liquid into, ete.
gametse - has milked a cow, etc. for.
gamodisa - cause or help to clean entrails; help to wring out or expel moisture from clothes, etc.
gamodisitse - has helped to expel moisture from wet clothes, etc.; has helped to clean entrails.
gamodisitswe - has been helped to expel moisture from wet clothes, etc.
gamodisiwa - being helped to expel moisture from wet clothes, ete.
gamoga - become squeezed; be wrung; be on the way to maturity, in behaviour; be served right, as when suffering the consequences of wrongdoing.
gamogêla - be wrung out for; be made to behave well.
gamogetse - has been wrung out for.
gamogetswe - has been splattered or smeared with the contents of the bowel of a slaughtered animal. gamola_v.s.simp., draw out; squeeze out; wring out; punish severely.
gamolêla - squeeze out; wring out on behalf of; punish severely.
gamolêlwa - being squeezed out; being wrung out; being severely punished.
gamoletse - has squeezed out for; has wrung out for; has punished severely for.
gamoletswe - has been squeezed out; has been severely punished.
gamolwa - being wrung out; being punished severely.
gamotsê - has squeezed out; has wrung out.
gamotswê - was squeezed out; was wrung out.
gampuditse - has beaten something a lot; has swung something about, such as a stick.
gamputsa - (same as "gompola"), beat much; swing a thing about, as a stick. | gamutlha v.s.simp.,close the arms tight around a thing; grasp the mouth of a sack with both hands; overtighten a belt around a body. } gamutlhaka v.s.Exr, close the arms tight around a thing, awkwardly; grasp the mouth of a sack, carelessly. /.
gamutlhana - overtighten belts around one another's bodies.
gamutlhêga - become crushed by arms closed tight around a body; be caused discomfort by a firm grasp around the body.
gamutlhegile - has become crushed by arms closed tight around the body.
gamutlhêla - ose the arms tight around a thing for; grasp the mouth of a sack with both hands for.
gamutlhetse - have the mouth of a sack grasped with both hands for; have the arms closed tight around a thing for; has held a belt or cord tightened round the body for.
gamutlhetswe - has been overtightened round the body for; something (e.g. a length of rope) has been closed tight round a thing.
gamutlhile - has closed the arms tight round a thing; has grasped the mouth of a sack with both hands; has overtightened the belt round a body.
gamutlhilwe - have something (e.g. a rope) closed tight round a thing; have grasped the mouth of a sack with both hands; being in a state of discomfort owing to a belt that is being tightened round the body.
gana - refuse; disagree; deny; reject.
gana gana - refuse a little; be hesitant; be half decided.
ganaka - be adamant; persist in denying; be unnecessarily opposed to.
ganana - be delinquent; behave in an unbecoming manner; be unco-operative.
ganane - has behaved in an unbecoming and delinquent manner.
ganê - DER. ADJ.s.veê, four times.
ganeditse - has contradicted refuted or resisted.
ganeditswe - has been contradicted; has been refuted; has been opposed.
ganediwa - (same as "ganetswa being contradicted"),; being refuted.
ganêga - be disputable; be arguable; be impossible; be in order to object to; be in order to refuse or refute.
ganegile - was disputed; was successfully argued; has not worked out well, or has failed as a plan.
ganêla - deny; refute; not allow; dispute.
ganêlana - contend together, or with or among each other.
ganêlane - (same as "ganêlanye").
ganêlêla - be adamant; stick to a point; insist on; refuse to come out of.
ganeletse - is/was adamant; has stuck to a point; insisted on, or refused to come out of.
ganetsa - refute; contradict; negate; oppose.
ganetsana - oppose one another; contradict each other; discuss; argue.
ganetsantsê - (same as "ganetsanye"), have contended with each other; have striven with one another; have discussed.
ganetse - has refuted contradicted, negated or opposed.
ganetswa - (same as "ganediwa being contradicted"),; being refuted.
gangwe - OFMAN.,DER.F.ADJ.S. < mgwe, once; one time, gangwe le gapê.
ganiwa - being rejected; being denied; being refused.
gankafala - become bold, or valiant.
gankêga - be bold, or valiant; become bold, or valiant.
gankegile - has become bold or valiant.
gannê - has refused; has denied; has rejected. ZAaNse N.CL.90-, SING. OF diganse [borrowed] goose.
gantsha - cause to reject, or refuse.
gantsheditse - has not given permission; has not allowed.
gantsheditswe - has not been allowed permission; has not been given permission.
gantshetsa - refuse permission for; not allow to.
gantshisa - help, or cause to refuse.
gantsi - DER.F.ADJ.S. < nfsi, many times; very often; frequently.
gantsintsi - very many times; innumerable times; countless times.
ganwa - (same as "ganiwa"), being rejected.
ganyaodisa - help to kill in large numbers.
ganyaodisisa - 1nr. < ganyaodisa, help to kill in large numbers and mercilessly.
ganyaodisiwa - being helped or caused to kill in large numbers and mercilessly.
ganyaola - kill in large numbers; exterminate.
ganyaolaka - kill large numbers and mercilessly.
ganyaolana - kill large numbers of each other's group mercilessly.
ganyaolêga - become butchered mercilessly.
ganyaolêla - butcher mercilessly for.
gaodisa - meet someone by chance; come across something infrequently.
gaodisitse - similar to kgabodisitse, has come across.
gaodisitswe - similar to kgabodisitswe, has been seen, or found by mere chance.
gaodisiwa - (same as "gaodiswa similar to kgabodisitse"), being seen or found by mere chance.
gaola - make a casual visit; go on rare occasions; make a flying visit.
gaolaka - short, casual visits.
gaolêla - make casual visits for, or to.
gaoletse - has made casual visits for or to.
gaoletswe - being visited ona casual basis; visiting on a casual basis.
gaologa - (same as "gaologa"), roar as a lion; call out; shout out.
gaotsê - has made a casual visit; has made, or is making an occasional trip; is making a flying visit.
gapa - take by authority; take by force; seize; stop an individual from doing wrong.
gapaka - seize, or plunder mercilessly; take large quantities of, by authority or by force.
gapana - attract each other; save each other from danger; appeal strongly to one another through having similar manners and attitudes.
gapê - again; once more; repeat.
gapê gapê - again and again; repeatedly; once more.
gapêga - easy to take by authority, or by force; capable of being drawn to something or someone.
gapegile - taken by authority, or by force; is rehabilitated or reformed.
gapêla - take by force, or by authority for; seize; retrieve, etc. to the benefit of.
gapêlwa - being deprived of a thing by force, or by authority; being made to forfeit property; being taken captive.
gapetse - has seized from or for; has lawfully taken from; has arbitrarily taken from.
gapetswe - has been seized from, or for; has been arbitrarily taken from; has been lawfully taken from.
gapile - has taken by authority; has taken by force; has seized, etc.
gapilwe - being taken by authority, or by force; was taken by authority, or by force.
gapisa - cause or help to seize, or take by authority; help to drive animals.
gapisitse - has caused or helped to seize, or taken by authority; has helped to drive animals.
gapisitswe - has been helped or caused to seize or take by authority.
gapisiwa - being helped or caused to seize or take by authority; being helped to seize.
gapiwa - (same as "gatswa"), being taken by authority; being taken or seized by force; being won over.
gapoga - (same as "fapoga"), go off a road; shunt to the side; detour; make a temporary stop.
gapogaka - (same as "fapogaka"), make too many detours.
gapogêla - (same as "fapogêla"), give way to; shunt to the side for.
gapogêlana - give way to each other; stop at each other's places before proceeding on a trip.
gapogêlane - has shunted to the side for another's sake.
gapogetse - has turned from the path in some other direction.
gapogetswe - has been given right of way.
gapogile - has turned off the path; has made a detour.
gapogisa - cause or help to go off the path.
gapogisiwa - being made to turn off the path.
gapogiwa - being detoured.
gaposa - (same as "gapogisa"), made to deviate; caused to shunt to the side.
gaposeditse - has been made to deviate; has been caused to shunt to the side.
gaposediwa - being made to deviate for; being shunted aside.
gaposetsa - cause to deviate for; cause to shunt aside something.
gaposetswa - being made to deviate for; being made to shunt aside for.
gara - coil.
garagantsê - has made to coil; has made into a small cushion, anything that can be coiled.
garaganya - (same as "garanya"), make into a small cushion, anything that can be coiled; cause tocoil.
gararo - OFMAN,DER.F. raro, thrice; three times.
garase - barley. ae [borrowed].
garataro - DER.F. rataro, six times.
garawe - spades [borrowed].
gare - S., TAKES PREF. LIKE fa-, ha-, and momiddle; midst; between; halfway.
gare ga naga - PHR, the middle of the veld; the open country; in the wilderness; far away.
garêga - capable of being coiled up into a cushion.
garegile - has become coiled up; has cushioned satisfactorily, or well.
garêla - to cushion a weight that is being carried; to place a cushion under something; to coil for; eat some food to stave off hunger for a short while.
garenata - popular as a home remedy [borrowed].
garepa - (FoR, harps.
gareteng - (same as "gareteng"), curtains [borrowed].
garetse - has provided a coiledup object under to act as a cushion; has eaten a weight light meal to stave off hunger.
garo - tear suddenly, or unexpectedly; experience a sudden awareness of the heart beating.
garoga - become torn or rent; eruption of spots or sores; palpitation. garoga pelo v.pur, awareness of heart-beat; get a fright.
garogaka - become torn, or rent repeatedly; has repeated attacks, or palpitations.
garogana - in a state of succumbing easily to palpitations.
garoganya - tear in bits; tear to pieces.
garogêla - be torn, or rent for; erupt, as spots or sores; develop a rash.
garogetse - has become torn or rent; has suffered palpitations due to.
garogetswe - has been torn or rent.
garogile - has become covered with spots or sores; have a rash; has experienced palpitations.
garola - tear with the teeth or hands.
garolaka - tear violently.
garolakile - has torn violently.
garolêga - capable of being torn with teeth, or hands.
garolêla - tear with teeth, or hands for.
garoletse - has torn with teeth or hands, for.
garolwa - or hands.
garotsê - has torn with teeth, or hands.
garotswê - has been torn with teeth, or hands.
garuba_ - gnaw, as a dog a bone; cause a gnawing pain, as ripening abscess; dig on one side after having dug straight down, as when making a grave according to Setswana custom.
garubile - has gnawed, as a dog a bone; has dug one side, etc. as when digging a grave in the traditional way.
garuma - snarl, as an angry dog; pounce upon, as a bully on a victim.
garumaka - snarl endlessly, fiercely repeatedly, as an angry dog.
garumêla - snarl at, as an angry dog.
garumêlwa - being snarled at, by an angry dog; being rushed and pounced upon.
garumetse - has snarled at.
garumetswe - has been snarled at, as by an angry dog.
garumile - has snarled, as an angry dog; has pounced upon.
garumisa - make to snarl.
garumisiwa - being caused to snarl at; being made to pounce upon.
garumiwa - (same as "garungwa or garunywa"), being snarled at, as by an angry dog.
garunywa - (same as "garungwa and garumiwa"), being snarled at, as by an angry dog.
gasa - scatter, or throw about, in all directions, as sand; scatter seed, etc.; sprinkle.
gasa-gasa - Scatter, or litter the place; spread far and wide, as rumour or scandal; throw about without concern. gasaka y.s.ExT, scatter over a wide area.
gasakana - to be scattered everywhere; to be strewn about.
gasakantsê - has scattered over a wide area; has strewn about.
gasakantswê - has been scattered everywhere or all over the place.
gasakanya - scatter about; let something lie strewn all over the place haphazardly; drive away with impatience.
gasama - become spread, or scattered about in all directions. gasame V.Ss.PFT. < gasama, is spread or scattered in all directions.
gasamêla - be spread, or scattered for.
gasamisa - cause to be scattered, or dispersed.
gasamisiwa - being scattered; being made to disperse.
gasana - splatter or spray each other.
gasanêla - splatter or spray something at each other.
gasanya - cause to be scattered.
gasanyetsa - scatter about for.
gase - same as kêsê gas [borrowed].
gaseditse - has scattered, or splattered or sprayed for, or to.
gaseditswe - has been scattered or sprayed for, or to.
gasediwa - being scattered for or to.
gasêga - get scattered; become sprinkled, or splattered or sprayed.
gasêgêla - splash over.
gasêgêlwa - being splattered with; being sprinkled with.
gasegetse - has splattered with etc.
gasegetswe - has been splattered with.
gasegile - is splattered, or scattered or sprinkled.
gasetsa - splatter or sprinkle for.
gasetswa - being scattered for being scattered onto or into something.
gasitse - has splattered; has sprinkled.
gasiwa - being sprinkled; being sprayed with. gasomê aADv. DER. F. /esomê, ten times.
gasupa - seven times.
gata - tramp, or tread; lie upon, as a stone on something; straighten wood by bending.
gata gata - tramp or tread gently frequently, intently.
gataka - tramp; or tread indiscriminately; treat badly; ill-treat.
gatakêlwa - being trodden on because of; being looked down upon.
gatakwa - being trodden on indiscriminately, with pomp, etc.
gatana - tread or tramp on each other; be | overcrowded. |.
gatane - trod or trampled on | each other, etc.
gatanêla - tramp on each other for; be massed together for.
gatêga - be trodden on; be ina daze.
gatêgêla - êga, become trodden on; be in a daze over.
gategile - is trodden on; is dazed.
gatêla - tread or trample or tramp for.
gatêlêga - become overcome by illness; become hard-pressed, or hard put to.
gatêlêla - êla, tread down; press down to the ground, as in wrestling; lie upon with the body, hence rape; suppress, or subjugate; emphasise; press hard on a pen when writing; drive loose cattle.
gatêlêlêga - become driven as loose cattle; capable of being suppressed, as a people.
gatêlêlêla - êlêla, tread down; suppress, or subjugate for; drive loose cattle for, or to.
gateleletswe - has been driven for; has been suppressed for.
gateletse - has suppressed; has emphasised; has driven, as loose cattle.
gateletswe - has been driven; being laid low by illness.
gatile - has trodden on; has trampled upon.
gatilwe - has been trodden on; has been trampled upon.
gatisa - cause to tread, or tramp on, etc.; print; register, as with registra of deeds; impress; massage; press or iron clothing.
gatisitse - has printed; has registered; has impressed; has pressed or ironed clothing.
gatisitswe - has been registered; has been pressed down; has been printed.
gatisiwa - (same as "gatiswa"), being registered; being printed; being pressed down by some object.
gatiwa - (same as "gatwa"), being trampled; being trodden on; being lain on, by a stone or something.
gatla - or club.
gatlaka - strike often, with a stick or club; beat badly with a stick, etc.
gatlakile - has struck often, with a stick or club; has beaten badly with a stick, etc.
gatlampola - cane severely; kill large quantities mercilessly.
gatlampolaka - hit mercilessly, or large numbers of; kill many mercilessly.
gatlampolana - hit each other mercilessly; kill large numbers of each other's groups.
gatlampolêga - be easily killed in large numbers.
gatlampolegile - have been killed in large numbers.
gatlampolêla - kill off large numbers for.
gatlatla - barricade.
gatlatlile - barricaded.
gatleditse - has pierced with a sharp instrument; has made a clicking noise; has walked with creaking boots.
gatletsa - pierce with a sharp instrument; make a clicking noise; walk with creaking boots.
gatlha - similar to funêla, gird; tie.
gatlhaka - gird everyone; tie and untie frequently, etc.
gatlhalêla - gatêlêla is more frequently used.
gatlhaletse - has driven loose cattle.
gatlhamêla - rush on without looking; intrude into speech.
gatlhamêla - foolishly enter or take part in; rush into.
gatlhana - gird each other.
gatlhano - s., five times.
gatlhêga - similar to bofêga, capable of being tied or bound, as a girdle.
gatlhegile - is properly bound or tied.
gatlhêla - bind, or tie for.
gatlhile - has tied.
gatlhologa - capable of being loosened, as a girdle.
gatlholola - untie; loosen a girdle.
gatlholotsê - has loosened a girdle.
gatlholotswê - has been loosened.
gatlile - has struck with a thick stick or club.
gatoga - take the foot off something; stop trampling on something.
gatogêla - take the foot off something for; stop trampling on for.
gatogile - has taken the foot off anything.
gatolola - free an object from being pressed down.
gatosa - remove, take an object off another.
gatosêtsa - removed for.
gatositse - has removed; has removed from.
gatositswe - has been removed; has been removed from.
gatsedisa - (same as "gatsetsa freeze"),; cause to be frozen.
gatsedisitse - has made frozen; has frozen.
gatsedisitswe - has been caused to freeze.
gatsedisiwa - being caused to freeze.
gatsediwa - being frozen; being made to freeze.
gatsêla - ot; have rheumatism; freeze.
gatsêla - congeal; freeze; the word sitwa is more commonly used for human beings.
gatsetsa - (same as "gatsedisa"), make a thing freeze; freeze.
gatsetse - has frozen; has stiffened with cold.
gatsetswa - Šs. < gatsetsa, being frozen; being made stiff with cold.
gatsetswe - being frozen.
gatshane - a piece or remnant of oxhide or sole leather.
gatšwa - (same as "gapiwa"), being taken by authority.
gatwa - etc.
gaufeditse - (same as "kgaupeditse"), which is commonly used; has silenced; has restrained from making noise, ete.
gaufetsa - (same as "kgaupetsa"), which is more frequently used; silence harshly; restrain from doing.
gaufi - near; very near; nearby.
gaugane - [D., anxiety.
gaumakwê - N. A9-, Same as santlhokwe, bile; gall; a plant used for medicinal purposes.
gaupanê6 - crinkle, as a skin that is burning; stand on end, as the hair.
gaupantsê - has caused to crinkle, or wrinkle.
gaupanya - cause to crinkle wrinkle or bend, as a skin that is burning.
gaupanye - has crinkled, or wrinkled.
gautsa - grind with the teeth; produce a grating noise in the mouth.
gautshwane - AND T., PROB. A DIM. OF gaufi, very near; a little while ago.
gautshwane - OFPLA.ANDT.,DIM. < gaufi, much nearer, very much nearer; a little while ago, or later. ge EncuiTic. (used in the Sekgatla dialect), expresses surprise, appeal, same as he and ne. O batlang ge? Pray, what do you want?.
ge - when; if (used in the Sekgatla dialect).
gêga - can be fetched or drawn; is in quantities that can be drawn.
gehitlhantsê - DIAL. VAR. OF figitihantsê, has dashed, or crushed to pieces.
gehitlhanya - DIAL. VAR. OF figitlhanya dash or crush to pieces.
gêla - as water, etc.
gêlêbêtêga - be excited; speak in a high voice; speak loudly; screech like the note of a trumpet when blown loudly; roar angrily and suddenly.
gêlebetegile - was excited; spoke in a high voice, ete.
gêlebetla - make a shrieking noise, ete.
gelebetlile - has made a shrieking noise ete.
gelekeditse - has talked a lot and noisily.
geleketsa - talk much and noisily.
gêlêla - êla, draw water from; has tears showing in the eyes; said also when rain clouds appear in the sky.
gelêlêga - capable of being drawn in quantities that can be scooped into something.
gêlêlêla - êlêla, draw water into something for use by someone, or something else.
geleletse - drawn water from and poured into something for use etc; drawn a liquid from.
geletse - has drawn from, etc.
gelodisa - cause or help to wipe with the hand, as sweat.
geloga - be scooped off with the hand, as sweat; scrape off, as a layer of oil floating over a heavier liquid.
gelogêla - as a layer of oil, etc.
gelogile - wipe off with the hand, as sweat; scraped off a layer of fat or some impurities.
gelola - wipe off with the hand, as sweat; scrape off layer of fat or oil or impurities.
gelolêla - wipe off with the hand, as sweat.
geloletse - has scooped off with the hand, as sweat for.
geloletswe - being scooped off with the hand, as sweat for.
gelotsê - has scooped off a layer of fat or some impurities.
gelotswê - said of a layer of fat or impurities that has been scraped off, etc.
gêma - be cooked badly, said especially of thick porridge.
gêmaka - be cooked badly, easily, for no good reason.
gêmêla - be cooked badly against.
gêmpê - DIAL. VAR. or hêmpê, shirt.
gile - has drawn water, or any other liquid.
gisiwa - (same as "giswa"), being helped to draw water, etc.
giwa - being drawn (of water) being fetched. gO 1ST AND 2ND ELEMENT OF ADJ. CONC, CL.15 gO tsamaya go gontlê, travelling (it) is beautiful; ci.16 fatshe go gontlê, down (below) (it) is beautiful; ct.17 godimo go gontlê (above) up, (it) is beautiful; ci.1s moseja go gontlê (across) yonder (it) is beautiful. 80 2ND ELEMENT OF REL. CONC, go tsamaya mo go itumedisang, travelling that is pleasing. Nx. some dialects use go as 1ST AND 2ND ELEM., thus go tsamaya go go itumedisang.
gO CL.1MO- AND 1409 - WHEN THE OBJ. SHOULD BE ABS. PRON. wênd, ba ga bênê (wêna), they saw you. 80 CL.17GO-, PREF. godimo, above nouns of this cl. are used mainly as locative advs. o CL. 15 AND 16 DEM. OF 2ND POS. go_ IN DIAL. V. WITH go tsamaya gono, this travelling here nearer, associated with the person spoken to. isr ELEM. OF DEM. 4TH POS. go tsamaya gole, that travelling, equidistant from both the speaker and the person spoken to, timewise. 80 CL. 15 AND 17 ENUM. CONC. FORTHE STEMS Sele, as in go sele, some other, or different; gofe, which one; gopê, a certain one, or whichever; gongwe, some or a certain one. Nn.B.gofe le gofe and gongwe le gongwe, mean any, or whichever, or all regardless of type. ZO CLS.15, 16, 17, AND 18, OBJ. CONC.,0 @ go batla (go rêka, fatshe, godimo, moseja), he wants it (to buy, below, above, across). N.B.1,except for CL.15 Go-, the above constructions are rarely.
gO - S.15, 16, 17, AND 18, SUBJ. CONC., 9 [SHORT FORM], g0 rêka go thusa, that buying is very helpful, fatshe go kolobile, below it is wet; godimo go lelafetse, above it has become hot; moseja go lengwa mabêlê, the her end sorghum growing is being done.
gO FORMS PART OF - PHRS., Such as: ka go bo, ka go bane, ka gore, etc.; because.
gO JOINS THE - V. AND THE MAIN V. IN PRED. PHRS like ke batla gore a tlê by being prefixed to re and signifies that.
gO USED IN - PRED., to signify it (is), as in go thata, it (is) difficult; go bosigo, it (is) night time. gO PREF. OF INF. OR GERUND, go rêka, to buy or buying. go CL.15 GO-, PREF, not joined to the stem, go rêka, to buy. NB. goexpresses neither singular nor plural.
go @ - [LONG FORM], CLS. 15, 16, 17, AND 18, does not require a complement, go tsamaya go a ruta, travelling teaches; fatshe go a tshosa, below it is frightening, etc. go êla tlhôkê 1. expr, to take note of; to observe.
go itshwarisa moreku - to masturbate (used of a male). go kgwa setšhane 1p. Expr, to breathe heavily due to over-exertion; to spit froth due to exhaustion, or to froth at the mouth due to exhaustion. go kgwa setšhwe 1p. Expr, Same as go kgwa setshane, to breathe heavily due to overexertion.
go le cor - PHR, being so; being; go le gonnye, being little or just a little, go le gotona, being a lot; used also in narrative sequences as in go le ênê, malomê le nna, it being or there was he, uncle and I.
go na le - pur, there is; there being, NEG.,is ga gona. NB.a complement is required.
go nnye PRED - PHR, it (being) small; small.
go ntse - it (is) enough, it is, as in go ntse jalo, it is so. go êpa mokgosi 1p. ExPr, to call a gathering, or meeting.
gO re INFIN - PHR,go, (we AND re, Say, as in ke go re that is to say.
go $a - < go-no, pHR. same as legoko, or pilê, burning; burnt veld.
go thwantsha monwana v - PHR, to snap a finger.
go tiisa mok6 - strengthen; to become industrious, or energetic.
go tlhaba mokgosi - to raise an alarm.
goa - cry aloud; cry out loudly; call someone, in a loud voice; shout.
goa-goa - cry aloud, or shout at frequent intervals; reprimand publicly; censure rudely.
goafele - (same as "gofejane"), the last child a woman will have.
goagoana - shout at each other, as in games.
goaka - cry aloud vigorously; cry aloud, as if very frightened, etc.
goakana - call out together hence make a din.
goalalêla - intrude, or do things which are not in one's province.
goalana - similar to goana, call out to one another.
goana - call one another in a loud manner.
goba - be bow-legged; refuse a thing; beat a bush to get off thorns; clean a surface by rubbing with sand, or a similar material; scold; cough.
gobagobetsa - act as a task-master; be exacting with a servant; urge others to work on.
gobala - (same as "golafala"), have an accident.
gobalala - similar to rapalala, lie stretched out on the ground.
gobana - rub against each other, as two objects, or scold each other; gotlhana is more commonly used.
gobasa - (same as "golafatsa"), injure. gobe NON-V. PRED, it (is) bad; it (is) nasty.
gobea - move from place to place aimlessly.
gobeaka - be preoccupied with moving about excitedly and in all directions.
gobedi - s, twice; the frame takes the form go le go-, and it becomes a NON-V. PRED.
gobeditse - has put back; has kept back; has imposed upon.
gobeile - has moved about excitedly and in all directions.
gobeisa - cause to move about excitedly and in all directions.
gobeisiwa - being made to move about excitedly and in all directions.
gobeiwa - etc.
gobêla - deny something falsely for.
gobeleditse - has become partial to a person.
gobêlêla - be partial to a person; be unfair, or unjust.
gobeletse - has exaggerated.
gobera - spoil or ruin; make a thing worse than it was before; spoil, or devastate, as a swarm of locusts.
goberêga - become changed for the worse, or spoiled; be worse for wear; suffer a reversal of fortune.
goberegile - has become changed for the worse, or spoiled; has become worse for wear; has suffered a reversal of fortune.
goberile - has spoiled or ruined; has made a thing worse than it was before, etc.
gobetsa - put back; keep back; impose upon.
gobiwa - being cleaned by rubbing with sand; being scrubbed; being scolded.
gobo - pHR,same as ka gobo, because.
gobola - similar to gotola, gaze hard; look earnestly at; make room for a sleeve, as when knitting a jersey, etc.
gobolêla - gaze earnestly at someone or something.
goboletse - has gazed earnestly at someone or something.
gobolodisa - cause to speak scornfully to; cause to revile, upbraid or defame.
gobolola - speak scornfully; revile; upbraid; defame; be spiteful.
gobololaka - speak scornfully at every opportunity; indulge in reviling, upbraiding, defaming and being spiteful.
gobololana - speak scornfully about one another; revile, defame one another, etc.
gobololêga - capable of being reviled upbraided, etc.
gobololêla - upbraid, defame for.
gobololwa - being reviled, upbraided, etc.
gobolotsê - has reviled, upbraided, etc.
gobolotswê - has been reviled, upbraided, etc.
gobua - walk through a lot of water; walk about in muddy or murky water.
gobuaka - do a lot of walking through water.
gobuêga - be murky, as water with suspended materials in it.
gobuêla - pass through a lot of water on foot for.
gobuile - has walked through a lot of water.
gobuisiwa - being caused or made to walk through much water.
godi - 9N-, gunpowder [borrowed].
godiêla - make a noise.
godieletse - has made a noise over anything.
godile - has gathered or harvested, fruits, berries or edible insects.
godile - has reached manhood, or womanhood; has grown tall, high, etc.; has tired of a thing; has stopped loving (someone or something); has outgrown; has grown; has grown to maturity; has grown old.
godimo - used mainly as a Loc. aDv. with prefixes like mo-, kwa-, fa-, etc. above; high.
godisa - cause or make something grow; lift on high; exalt; rear, or nurture a growing thing; adopt as a child.
godisa - cause or help to gather or harvest fruits, berries or edible insects.
godisaka - be preoccupied with nurturing a growing thing, etc.; exalt a thing.
godisana - praise one another; look after each other from youth to maturity.
godisetsa - raise a child for someone.
godisitse - has made something grow; has exalted, or lifted on high, etc.
godisitswe - has been made to grow; has been exalted, or lifted on high, etc.
godisiwa - being made to grow etc; being reared; being adopted as a child.
goditse - (same as "gotsitse"), looks like, resembles someone; has started a fire; has made a fire.
goduma - drink or sip, generally done with hot liquids; drink or sip with a whistling noise.
godumaka - drink or sip a lot of; drink or sip noisily, endlessly, etc.
godumêga - capable of being sipped, as gruel or a liquid.
godumêla - drink or sip.
godumetse - has drunk or sipped.
godumile - has drunk or sipped.
godumisa - cause or help to drink or sip.
godumisana - cause or help one another to sip or drink.
godumisitse - has caused or helped to drink or sip.
godumisitswe - has been caused or helped to drink or sip.
godumisiwa - being caused to drink or sip; being helped to drink or sip.
godumiwa - (same as "godungwa"), being sipped, or drunk.
goêla - shout loudly.
goeleditse - has shouted loudly for, or at.
goêlêga - get into a state of disliking something, as food.
goêlêla - êla, shout loudly at; make fun of by loud abusive shouts.
goêlêlana - shout loudly at each other.
goeletsa - shout at the top of one's voice; call in a very loud voice.
goeletsa - hound off, or out, by shouting.
gofejane - same as gofele and goafele, the last child in a family.
gofele - (same as "goafele and gofenyane/gofejane"), the last child in the family. j.
goga - draw; draw on; draw in; pull; lead as oxen that are inspanned; smoke a pipe; take snuff.
gogaka - drag about; smoke a lot.
gogana - pull each other; have a tug of war.
gogêga - be drawn; be pulled.
gogêla - draw to, or into; lead to, or into.
gogêlana - pull something away from one another; to pull something together as in a tug of war.
gogetse - has drawn; has led.
gogetswe - has been drawn to by; has been led to or into, by.
gogisa - help to draw, pull, lead, etc.; teach to smoke tobacco, similar to goisa.
gogisitse - has helped to draw in; has helped to pull.
gogisiwa - being helped to pull draw or smoke tobacco.
gogiwa - being led along; being drawn; being smoked.
gogoa - Similar to gogoba, gather all.
gêgdba - (same as "gagaba"), creep, or crawl along; walk as a very weak person.
gogoba - similar to gogoa, rake together;. gather up small things; remove rubbish.
gêgdbaka - (same as "gagabaka"), crawl along ceaselessly.
gogobaka - to gather kindling to use in keeping a fire going.
gogobêga - can be gathered; ina condition to be gathered (as kindling to start a fire or keep a fire going).
gogôbêla - (same as "gagabêla"), crawl towards.
gogobêlêla - êla, same as gagabêlêla, crawl powerfully.
gogobelêla - êla, gather quickly a lot of kindling.
gogdbetse - (same as "gagabetse has crawled towards").
gogobetse - has gathered kindling.
gogdbisa - cause or help to crawl along.
gogobisa - cause or help to gather kindling.
gogdbisitse - (same as "gagabisitse"), has caused or helped to crawl along.
gogobisitse - has caused or helped to gather kindling.
gogdbisitswe - (same as "gagabisitswe"), has been caused to crawl along, ete.
gogobisitswe - has been caused or helped to gather kindling.
gogobisiwa - (same as "gagabisiwa"), being caused or helped to crawl along.
gogdbiwa - being crawled along.
gogobiwa - as dry twigs.
gogodisa - help to gather and to carry away, as garbage; cause to carry away, as by a flood.
gogodisitse - has gathered and carried away.
gogodisitswe - has been caused or helped to gather together and to carry away, etc.
gogodisiwa - (same as "gogodiswa"), being helped or caused to gather and to carry away, etc.
gogola - carry away, as a flood; carry away, as a wind carries stubble or chaff; gather together and take away.
gogolaka - gather and take away plenty of.
gogolêga - can be gathered to be taken away.
gogolêla - gather together and take away.
gogoletse - has gathered together and taken away.
gogolo - s.used as a REL.CL.15, abundance.
gogolopa - quarrel.
gogoma - project; to make a noise like driving rain.
gogomêla - project beyond; to make a noise like driving rain.
gogometse - has projected beyond; has made a noise like driving rain.
gogomile - has projected; has made a noise like driving rain.
gogomoga - rise, as dough; swell out, as a heart from excitement; be puffed or bloated; rise up, as water in a flood.
gogomogile - has risen, as dough; has swollen, as a heart from excitement; has become puffed up, etc.
gogomosa - cause to rise, as dough; cause to swell out, as a heart from excitement.
gogomoseditse - has caused to rise for.
gogomositse - has caused to rise, as dough, etc.
gogomositswe - has been caused to rise, as dough.
gogona - to make a noise like the sides of a jerkin made of skin being drawn together; draw together; push together.
gogone - has sounded like the sides of a kaross being drawn together.
gogorala - (same as "gogorêla"), eat to be full, or be satisfied after a meal.
gogorêla - eat to be full, or be satisfied after a meal; be in the process of eating.
gogoretse - is full.
gogoropa - be curved, as arim of a wheel.
gogoropile - is curved, as a rim of a wheel.
gogorupa - gather as much as possible regardless of how little the others get; try to take the lion's share of.
gogorupaka - to take more than the lion's share of food, etc. that was meant for a group.
gogorupêga - can be lifted with a scoop as food; capable of being scooped.
gogorupêla - scoop up; take more than one's share of.
gogorupetse - has scooped up for; has taken more than a fair share for.
gogorupisa - cause to scoop more than one's fair share; help to make or take more than a fair share; cause to take in a rather greedy manner.
gogorupisiwa - being helped to scoop up more than one's fair share; being made to gather more than one's fair share of.
gogorupiwa - 's fair share.
gogotlêga - howl in excitement; make loud noises to show great pleasure.
gogotlegile - has howled in excitement.
gogotsê - has gathered something together and taken away.
gogotswê - has been gathered together and taken away.
gogoudisa - cause or help to drag along.
gogoudisitse - has caused or helped to drag something along.
gogoudisitswe - has been caused or helped to drag something along.
gogoudisiwa - being caused or helped to drag along.
gogoula - drag along; drag along at a fast pace; drag along recklessly and without showing any kind regard for; carry along, as something being taken by wind.
gogoulaka - drag something about; drag along repeatedly, continuously.
gogoulana - drag one another along.
gogoulane - have dragged one another along.
gogoulanya - cause, or help to drag one another along.
gogoulanye - have dragged one another along.
gogoulêga - capable of being dragged along.
gogoulêla - drag along for.
gogoutsê - dragged along.
gogwa - Šs. < gdga, same as gogiwa, being pulled.
gdgwana - as a skin.
gogwantsê - has shrunk up, or become shrivelled up, as a skin.
gogwantswê - has been shrunken up, or shrivelled up, etc.
gogwaniya - cause to shrink up, or become shrivelled; draw together, as the mouth of a bag, by a string.
goisa - cause to shout; shout rather loudly.
goisa - contracted form of gogisa, give a bit of one's tobacco or snuff to another.
goisaka - give some of one's snuff, or tobacco to many people, or give it away too often.
goisaka - to make someone shout a lot; shout indiscriminately, aimlessly, etc.
goisana - give each other some tobacco or snuff.
goisana - make each other shout.
goisediwa - (same as "goisetswa being made to give someone tobacco").
goisediwa - (same as "goisetswa being made to shout").
goisêga - capable of being given some tobacco or snuff.
goisetsa - give someone's snuff to another on someone else's behalf.
goisetsa - make someone shout.
goisisa - cause someone to give a bit of snuff to another.
goisisitse - has caused someone to give a bit of snuff to another.
goisisitswe - has been caused to receive snuff or tobacco.
goisitse - has given a bit of snuff to someone. ' goisitswe v.s. Pass. < goisitse, has been given a bit of snuff or tobacco by.
goisiwa - being given some snuff or tobacco.
goiwa - being called in a loud voice by; being shouted at.
gojwa - 'gobiwa, being scrubbed.
gokafala - state of committing fornication or adultery, same as akafala; capable of being tied together; become tied together.
gokafetse - (same as "akafetse").
gokagana - commit fornication with one another; be tied one to the other.
gokaganya - cause to commit adultery; cause to be tied together.
gokaganye - has been tied together.
gokara - grab, hold a thing in the hand before putting it down; pull an arrow on the string and hold it before shooting; bend a bow.
gokêla - thread; pass a lace through a hole; fasten or make secure by fastening; pin on, as a badge or some insignia.
gokêlêga - capable of being pinned on, or fastened.
gokêlêla - êla, tie on to; bind to; tie around, as a string of beads fastened around the neck.
gokêlêlwa - being tied on to; being tied or bound to; being tied around, as a string of beads when fastened around the neck.
gokeletse - has tied on to; has bound to; has tied around as beads around the neck.
gokeletswe - has been tied on to; has been bound to.
gokêlwa - being threaded; being fastened, or made secure by fastening.
gokere - has held with the hand; has bent a bow.
gokga - rip loose from the plant and harvest, pumpkins, melons, squashes.
gokgafala - be very old, used either of things or persons.
gokgafetse - is very old; has become very old.
gokgodile - has walked, or worked slowly, on account of stoutness.
gokgodisa - cause to walk or work slowly, on account of some infirmity.
gokgodisiwa - being caused to walk or work slowly, on account of some infirmity.
gokgola - walk, or work slowly on account of stoutness or some other infirmity.
gokgolêga - be finished; be bared.
gokgolegile - has become finished, or bared.
gokgolêla - walk, or work slowly, on account of stoutness.
gokgolêlwa - being made to walk or work slowly, on account of stoutness.
gokgoletse - has walked or worked slowly, on account of stoutness for.
gokgoletswe - walking, or working slowly, on account of stoutness; has been done by someone for the benefit of someone else.
gêla - (same as "amogêla"), draw a pension or a salary.
gola - gather, as fruits of one's labours; to gather fruit, berries, insects or worms; grow; grow up; increase in numbers. prov. < ka tlhagolêla mookana, ya re o gola wa ntlhaba.
gola - tire of a thing; cease to love or like what one has previously liked.
golafaditse - has injured maimed or deformed.
golafadiwa - (same as "golafatswa"), being injured, maimed or deformed.
golafala - be hurt or injured; become permanently maimed or deformed; be disabled.
golafatsa - hurt; injure.
golafatsana - injure, or maim one another.
golafetse - is injured, maimed or deformed.
golagana - as by a hook or twine; make a treaty or a covenant; team up.
golaganêla - join together for; make a treaty or a covenant.
golaganetse - has joined together for.
golaganolola - annul or abrogate a treaty or covenant.
golaganolotsê - annulled or abrogated a treaty or covenant.
golagantsê - has tied together; has made one; has caused to conspire together.
golagantswê - has been tied together; has been made one; has been caused to conspire together.
golaganya - draw together; cause to or make join hands together.
golaganye - have joined hands together; be at one over a certain decision.
gole - < go-, long ago; far away.
goledisa - cause or help to lift up. — sited v.s.pass. < goledisa, being caused or helped to lift up.
goleditse - has lifted up.
golediwa - being lifted up; being exalted; being raised or promoted.
golêga - bind fast; inspan; tie up an animal; put in prison; accuse falsely; bear false witness against.
golêgaka - bind fast many things; inspan many oxen, or inspan and outspan endlessly; imprison many people, etc.
golêgana - tie up each other; accuse each other falsely.
golêganya - cause to be bound together; tie up together.
golêganye - have tied each other up; have accused each other falsely.
golêgêla - fasten for; inspan for; put in stocks, or put in handcuffs for.
golêgêlêla - êgêla, with usage of a DER.S., tie on to, as a calf to a pole or asa parcel to a bigger piece of baggage.
golegeletse - has tied on to; has tethered to.
golegeletswe - has been fastened, or inspanned for, etc.
golegetse - has fastened, or inspanned for, etc.
golegile - has bound; has tied up.
golegilwe - has been bound; has been tied up; has been accused; has been led into a situation.
golegisa - cause or help to fasten; inspan, etc.
golegisana - help one another to fasten, inspan, etc.
golegisantsê - has helped one another to fasten, inspan, etc.
golegisitse - has helped to bind fast; has caused, or helped to inspan, etc.
golegisitswe - has been helped to bind fast, etc.
golegisiwa - being caused or helped to bind fast, inspan, etc.
golegiswa - (same as "golêgwa being bound fast"), etc.
golegiwa - (same as "golêgwa being bound fast"), etc.
golêla - grow to become wiser than.
goleletsa - raise higher for; pulling up clothing.
golêlwa - being due, i.e. being in an advanced state of pregnancy; being grown for or to.
golêtsa - exalt; heighten; lift up, as another person's arm; pull up trousers or a dress that is being worn by someone.
goletse - has grown, or grown up at, or for; has become wiser for.
goletsêga - be exalted; become lifted up.
goletsegêla - êga, be exalted for; be lifted up for.
goletsegile - has become exalted.
goletswe - is due, i.e. is in an advanced state of pregnancy.
golê - < go-, same as feld, most frequently.
gologa - become free, loose unbound, etc.
goloka - speak in an inaudible manner; roll into a ball; make compact; be in bud, like a rose.
golokêga - become rolled up; be made into a ball; be moulded or made compact.
golokegile - has become rolled into a ball, etc.; has become moulded or made compact.
golêla - lengthen; prolong; cut fresh meat into long thin strips, as a step towards hanging it out to dry. 1p. Expr, go gêlêla tlou le maroo.
golola - loose; unbind; deliver; absolve; set free; unharness, or outspan.
golêlêga - feel nausea; be bilious; retch as when one vomits.
golêlêga - to be of long duration; to be lengthy, as a talk; become cut into thin long strips, as meat about to be hung out to dry or be made into biltong.
gololêga - become free; be unfastened; be outspanned.
gêldlegile - has retched when vomiting.
gdlêlêla - prolong to.
gololêsêga - become free, unbound, etc.
gdlêlêsêga - as a talk etc.
goldlesegile - has become lengthy, as a talk, etc.
gololesegile - has become free, unbound, etc.
golologa - be lengthened out; become lengthened out.
golora - run about hither and thither like wild cattle; roam about aimlessly.
golorile - ran about hither and thither; roamed about aimlessly.
golotsê - has outspanned; has loosened, unbound or set free.
golotswê - has been outspanned; has been loosened, unbound or set free.
golwa - being gathered, as fruits berries, edible worms or insects.
goma - smear with dung; work beads, etc. into a pattern; ornamental brass work; cling to clothing, as burrs; inlay.
goma goma - be close to doing something; be threatening; threaten repeatedly to doa thing.
gomêla - be close to doing something; threaten to do something.
gometse - has come near to doing something; has threatened to doa thing.
gomile - has worked beads, etc. into a pattern; be covered by burrs.
gomisa - be on the verge of doing something.
gomisitse - has caused to be close to doing something; has been on the verge of doing something.
gomoditse - has comforted or given cheer to.
gomoditswe - has been comforted; has been given cheer.
gomoketsa - speak too generally.
gomola - (same as "gomnotsa"), which is commonly used, comfort; cheer.
gomotsa - comfort; give cheer.
gomotsaka - comfort a lot; give great cheer.
gomotsana - comfort one another; cheer each other up.
gomotsantsê - have comforted one another.
gomotsanya - (same as "gomotsana"), comfort one another; cheer each other up.
gomotsanye - have comforted one another; have cheered one another up.
gomotsêga - become comforted.
gomotsêgêla - êga, be comforted for.
gomotsegile - has become comforted. gompieno apv.oFT, similar to jaanong and jaanong jaana, today; at the present time; right now.
gompodisa - cause to be flogged.
gompodisitse - caused or made to be flogged.
gompodisitswe - has been caused or made to be flogged; has been led to be flogged.
gompoditse - has caused to be flogged.
gompoga - been flogged; capable of being flogged.
gompola - beat a lot; swing something about, as a stick; lash; flog.
gompolaka - lash, or flog a lot; lash or flog mercilessly.
gompolêla - lash for; flog for.
gompoletse - has lashed or flogged for.
gompoletswe - has been lashed for; has been flogged for.
gOna - 16, 17, AND 18, same as gOnê, it.
gona - (same as "Ona and rêra"), snore.
gona - similar to Auna, draw in, as a hand or foot; cause to shrink.
gonagana - have severe abdominal pain; have stiff joints.
gonama - be discontented or unhappy.
gonamana - (same as "gonama"), be discontented or unhappy.
gonamanye - has been in fear; has become afraid.
goname - (same as "gonamile has become discontented or unhappy").
gonamile - (same as "goname"), has become discontented or unhappy.
gOnê - 16, 17, AND 18, Same as gona, it.
goneditse - has made signs with fingers; has caused to bend; has retracted.
gonêga - become drawn in, or back; shrivel up; shrink.
gonegile - has become drawn in or back; has shrivelled up; has shrunk.
gonetsa - make signs with fingers.
gongwa - being ornamented with beads; being inlaid.
gongwe - AND ENUM. QUAL. CL. 15go-, maybe perhaps, possibly; gongwe o etla, maybe he is coming; o tswa golo gongwe, he comes from.
gonnê - has drawn in, or back.
gonne - PHR, because; for.
gonngwa - being plucked out.
gonoga - (same as "idibala"), go into a very deep sleep; become faint; be in the process of fainting; be very cross or angry.
gonogile - be ina very deep sleep; has fainted; has wasted away.
gondêkêlêla - chase after; follow at great speed with the intention of catching up.
gondêkeletse - has chased; has followed at great speed with the intention of catching up.
gonola - render unconscious; cause to faint; kill by throttling or choking.
gonotêlêla - (same as "gonokeletsa and konatêlêla arcu"), chase; follow at great speed with the intention of catching up. NB. the semantic shift in the meaning of konatêlêla.
gonoteletse - has chased; has followed at great speed with the intention of catching up.
gontsê - has plucked out; has picked out, etc.
gonya - hook out; pick out with a knife; pluck out, as an eye; draw out with a stick.
gonyaka - hook out, or keep on picking out with a knife, etc.
gonyana - poke at each other; pluck out as one another's eyes.
gonyeditse - > gonyetsa, has caused to peep out and disappear again; has made to retreat, as into a shell.
gonyeditse - > gonyetsa, has hooked out for; has picked out with a knife for; has plucked out, as an eye for; has drawn out with a stick for.
gonyeditswe - > gonyeditse, has been hooked out for, etc.
gonyediwa - > gonyetsa, being made to peep out and disappear again.
gonyêga - be hooked out; capable of being picked out with a knife, etc.
gonyegile - > gonyêga, has become hooked out; is picked out with a knife; has become plucked out, as an eye, etc.
gonyêla - peep out and disappear again; retract.
gonyêla - cause to disappear, peep in and out, shrink, draw back.
gonyetsa - hook out for; pick out with a knife for; pluck out, as an eye for; draw out with a stick for.
gonyetsa - > gonyêla, has caused to peep out and disappear again; has made to retract, as into a shell.
gonyetse - > gdnyêla, has peeped out and disappeared again; has retracted.
gonyisa - cause or help to hook out, ete.
gonyisiwa - > gonyisa, being caused or helped to hook out, etc.
gonyiwa - etc.
goo-Tawana - 9-, Ngamiland.
goomo - apparently; hence; and so; also this thing.
goora - at, as in at the home of so and so. The possessor could be an individual or many individuals.
goêpa - suck out, or draw out matter from an abscess; suck up, as cattle drinking a small quantity of water; keep silent and >) refuse to tell news.
gopa - remove, by scraping; sweep up, as rubbish or loose grass, etc.; crawl like a snake, or a baby.
gopaka - suck out, or draw out a lot of matter from an abscess; suck up a lot, as cattle drinking a small quantity of water.
gopakile - > gdpaka, has crawled about extensively; has sucked out, or down out a lot of matter from an abscess; has done a lot of sucking up, as cattle drinking a small quantity of water.
gopakile - > gopaka, has removed a lot by scraping; has crawled about extensively.
gdpana - stand on end, as the hair; grow thick [archaic].
gOpane - ¢., same as kgwathe, iguana.
gopê - s.,not at all; not in any way. Although mainly negative in usage, it can be used in the positive form: Ke ya gopê, I am going somewhere.
gopedisa - cause or help someone to give pieces of meat away.
gopedisitse - > gopedisa, has caused or helped someone to give small pieces of meat.
gopedisiwa - > gopedisa, being given small pieces of meat; be given small pieces of meat.
gopêga - > gdpa, capable of being sucked, as a small quantity of water.
gopêga - > gopa, can be swept or brushed up, as rubbish or loose grass, ete.
gopêla - suck out, etc. from an abscess for.
gopêla - brush up, etc. for; crawl for, or to.
gopêla - cut small pieces of meat for oneself; receive small pieces of meat cut from special parts of an animal carcass, as a reward for having helped to skin. gopêla pelo 1D. HR, to grieve; to be sore.
gopêlêlwa - > gopêlêla, being rewarded with pieces of meat.
gopêlêsêga - > gopêla, affordable to cut pieces of meat to give away as a reward.
gopeletse - > gopêla, has rewarded with pieces of meat.
gopisa - help or cause to sweep up tubbish.
gopisa - help or cause to suck out matter from an abscess, etc.
gopisitse - > gopisa, has helped or caused to suck out, etc.
gopisitswe - > gopisitse, has been helped or caused to brush up rubbish.
gopisiwa - > gdpisa, being helped to suck out, or draw out matter from an abscess.
gopisiwa - > gopisa, being helped to remove rubbish by scraping, or by scooping it up.
gopiwa - being sucked up, as matter from an abscess.
gopiwa - being removed by scraping.
gOpo - a large pit for trapping game; an elephant trunk.
gopodisa - (same as "gopotsa cause to think"), remember or recollect.
gopodisitse - has caused to think, remember, etc. about; has reminded; has made think.
gopodisitswe - has been caused or made to think, remember, etc. about.
gopodisiwa - (same as "gopodiswa"), being made to think, remember etc.; being reminded.
gopodiwa - (same as "gopotswa being reminded"),; being enjoined to think of or about.
gopola - think; meditate; remember; recollect; try to determine if livestock is all in.
gopolaka - be at sixes and sevens; remember many things.
gopolana - think of each other; have fine recollections about each other; readily assist each other.
gopolêga - memorable; be remembered.
gopolegile - is remembered; is recollected.
gopolêla - be suspicious.
gopolêlana - think for each other; be suspicious of one another.
gopolêsêga - easy to recall; can be remembered.
gopoletse - has thought for; has suspected another.
gopoletswe - has been thought for by; has been suspected of.
gopolwa - being remembered; being thought of, etc.
gopotsa - (same as "gopodisa cause to think"), remember or recollect.
gopotsê - has thought; has tried to recollect if all livestock was in.
gopotswê - being thought of; being remembered.
gêra - eat the remnants; acquire the remaining things; scrape something with the finger. 1p. expr, go gêra kika.
goragwereditse - has hastened [archaic].
goragweretsa - hasten [archaic].
goraka - scrape up leftover food.
gorakile - scrape up leftover food, etc. with the finger.
gorana - «Ec., similar to Jatswana, lick each other, as animals do.
goranêla - êrana, lick at each other for.
goranetsê - have licked each other for.
gore - that; so that; in order that.
gorêga - capable of being licked; having enough scraps of food to justify licking with the finger.
goregile - is licked.
gorile - has licked; has scraped with a finger.
gorilwe - has been licked; has been scraped.
gorisa - cause to scrape with the finger.
gorisantsê - have left scraps of food for each other.
gorisantswê - some food has been left by both parties for the benefit of either party.
gorisitse - has given what was intentionally left behind, especially food to someone.
gorisitswe - has been given food, or anything that may have been intentionaly left for a younger or junior person.
gorisiwa - (same as "goriswa being caused"), or helped to take the leftovers in a pot, or dish, etc.
goriwa - being licked. Zoro PRIM. INTERJ, rush in a group, instantly.
gorêga - arrive; finish a journey.
gordgêla - arrive at, or for.
gorêgêlwa - be visited; to receive news, goods, etc. from somewhere; is or was visited by.
gorogetse - has arrived at; has come to.
gorogetswe - being visited.
gorogile - has arrived; has finished a journey.
gorogotshega - move around.
gorola - (same as "gotola"), look earnestly at; remove grains of maize from a cob.
gorolêla - (same as "gotolêla"), remove grains of maize from a cob for.
goroletse - has removed grains of maize from a cob.
goromeditse - has caused something to gush out; has caused something to pour out.
goromêla - gush out in a stream; rush out in a crowd.
goromeleditse - has caused something to pour out, etc.
goromeletsa - pour all into; empty into.
goromeletse - has poured all into.
gorometsa - cause something to gush out; cause something to pour out.
gorometsêga - to rush out; to gush out.
gorometsegile - has rushed out, etc.
gorosa - (same as "gorotsha cause to arrive"),; bring cattle home; marry a wife.
goroseditse - has made to arrive for.
goroseditswe - has been made to arrive for.
gorosisa - help to arrive safely; help to make cattle arrive home.
gorosiwa - being made to arrive; being helped to arrive.
gorotsha - (same as "gorosa bring home the cattle"), goats, sheep, etc; cause to arrive; marry a wife.
goseditse - has caused to sip with compressed lips.
gosetse - has sipped with compressed lips.
gosi - CL.15 < go-, alone; only.
gOso - Expr, of falling in large quantities.
gošoma - totter, as a loose pole, or one about to fall; shake from looseness, as in big shoes; be agitated, as by startling news.
gosomaka - gush a lot; pour down, or out a lot.
gosomana - pour down in torrents; crumble, as a wall or a pile of stones.
gosomeditse - has cast down or pushed down for.
gosometsa - cast down; pour down; push down, as a tree.
gosometsêga - fall down, as a tree.
gosometsegile - has fallen down; has come gushing down.
gosomolola - or receive something in abundance.
gota - criminal intercourse.
gotedisa - (same as "gotetsa"), help to light, or kindle a fire; raise the temperature; make someone light a fire.
gotedisiwa - being helped to light or kindle (a fire), etc.
goteditse - has kindled (a fire); has put the light on; has lit.
goteditswe - (a fire) has been kindled; (something) has been set alight.
gotediwa - being made hot; being lighted; being made to burn.
gotêla - be or become hot.
gotêlaka - become very hot; become heated easily.
gotêlêla - be or become hot for; burn, or strike upon.
goteletse - become hot for.
gotetsa - kindle; set alight; make hot; inflame, or excite.
gotetse - has become hot; is excited.
gotisa - cause to have criminal intercourse.
gotisitse - has caused to have criminal intercourse.
gotisiwa - (same as "gotiswa"), being caused to have criminal intercourse.
gotla - twitch, as a dying thing.
gotlha - rub a thing; polish by rubbing; burnish; file down; wear smooth by rubbing.
gotlhaka - rub a thing a lot.
gotlhana - rub against one another; be at loggerheads.
gotlhane - have rubbed against one another; were at loggerheads.
gotlhantsê - have caused to rub against one another.
gotlhanya - cause to rub against one another, etc.
gotlhe - CL.15 < go-, all; altogether; entirely.
gotlheditse - has rubbed with palm of hand or sole of foot; has rubbed a thing between hands.
gotlhêga - be scraped successfully; be brushed off; become filed.
gotlhêla - rub a thing for.
gotlhetsa - rub with palm of hand or sole of foot; rub a thing between hands.
gotlhetse - has filed for; has cleaned a surface by rubbing for.
gotlhetswe - has been filed or scraped for.
gotlhile - has filed; has rubbed a thing.
gotlhilwe - has been filed; has been rubbed to remove something undesirable.
gotlhisa - cause or help to file, or rub off from a surface.
gotlhisisa - rub or file intensively.
gotlhisiwa - being helped to rub or file.
gotlhiwa - being polished or rubbed or made smooth.
gotlhodisa - cause or make to cough.
gotlhodisitse - has caused or made to cough.
gotlhodisitswe - has been made to cough.
gotlhodisiwa - being made to cough.
gotlhodiwa - (same as "gotlhotswa"), being caused to cough.
gotlhdêla - cough.
gotIhêlaka - cough a lot; cough extensively.
gotIhêlêga - in a condition to be coughed, or as when throat is not too dry.
gotlholegile - was in a condition to be coughed.
gotlhdlêla - cough for.
gotlhêlêlana - cough into the faces of one another.
gotlholetse - has coughed for the purpose of.
gotlholetswe - has been coughed for the purpose of.
gotIhwa - (same as "gotlhiwa"), being polished, or made smooth or rubbed; being given a telling-off, a hiding, etc.
gotodisa - cause someone to glare.
gotodisitse - has caused to glare, as an angry man.
gotodisitswe - has been caused to glare.
gotodisiwa - being caused to glare, as an angry man.
gotoga - (become) glared.
gotogaka - (become) glared a lot.
gotogêla - (become) glared for.
gotogile - has glared.
gotogisa - cause to glare.
gotogisitse - has caused to glare.
gotogisiwa - being caused to glare.
gotogiwa - glaring, as the eyes of an angry man.
gotola - (same as "rofola"), glare, as an angry man.
gotolaka - glare; glare constantly, or aimlessly, as an angry man.
gotolêga - capable of being made to glare; be made to glare.
gotolêla - glare at; fix the eyes on, in anger.
gotolêlaka - glare at continuously.
gotolêlana - glare at one another.
gotoletse - has glared at.
gotoletswe - has been glared at, as by an angry person.
gototsê - has glared, as an angry man.
gotsa - light, used of a fire; start a fire; resemble in behaviour, appearance.
gotsaka - light many fires; struggle to kindle a fire.
gotsakêla - light many fires for.
gotsana - resemble one another, said particularly of kinsmen.
gotsane - have resembled one another, said of kinsmen.
gotsanêla - kindle or start fires for each other.
gotsanya - impute that two individuals resemble each other.
gotsê - has gathered fruits, berries edible insects, etc.
gotsêdiwa - being made (a fire) for.
gotsêga - (a fire); capable of being resembled.
gotsêgêla - êga, become kindled for.
gotsegile - has become kindled or started (a fire).
gotsetsa - kindle or start (a fire) for.
gotsisa - help, or cause to start (a fire).
gotsisitse - has helped, or caused to start a fire.
gotsisitswe - has been helped or caused to start (a fire). gotsisiwav.s. pass. < gotsisa, being helped or caused to start a fire. i:.
gotsitse - has kindled, or lit (a fire); has taken after someone in behaviour.
gouta - (same as "gauta gold").
gwaa - similar to gwêtlha and sdêtlha thrust; poke, irritate, etc.
gwaêga - be pulled towards, or paid out as a rope; be hoarse.
gwaêgêla - êga, be pulled towards etc. for.
gwaêgile - has been pulled towards, or paid out; has become hoarse.
gwaêla - pull in towards, or pay out, a rope.
gwaêlaka - pull towards, or pay out many times.
gwaêlana - pull towards, or pay out towards for each other.
gwaeletse - has looked intently at.
gwaile - has paid out, or pulled in a rope.
gwaisa - cause or make to look intently.
gwaisitse - has caused or made to look intently at.
gwaisitswe - has been caused or made to look intently at.
gwaisiwa - being made to look intently at.
gwaitse - has looked intently.
gwaladisa - cause to fix eyes steadfastly; make to look earnestly.
gwaladisitse - has caused to fix eyes steadfastly; has made to look earnestly.
gwaladisitswe - has been caused to fix eyes steadfastly; has been made to look earnestly.
gwaladisiwa - being caused to fix eyes steadfastly; being made to look earnestly.
gwaladiwa - being fixed steadfastly.
gwalala - stretch up on tiptoe; exalt oneself, as one who refuses to listen and persists on his own course; hasten.
gwalalêla - or for.
gwalaletse - has stretched up to, or for.
gwalaletswe - has been stretched up to, or for.
gwalatsa - fix the eyes steadfastly; look earnestly.
gwale - AND 99- ANDN.-., aNp digwale, a pheasant.
gwaletse - has stretched up on tiptoe; has exalted oneself, etc., and persisted in one's own course.
gwaletswe - has been stretched up on tiptoe; has been exalted.
gwanta - be wilful; conduct oneself in a defiant, or impudent manner; walk arrogantly or proudly; show oneself off.
gwantaka - be excessively wilful; to conduct oneself in a defiant or impudent manner, etc.
gwantêga - be successful in conducting oneself in a defiant or impudent manner; capable of being wilful, etc.
gwantêla - be wilful for; be defiant, or impudent towards.
gwantêlana - display defiance; impudence or wilfulness.
gwantile - has been wilful defiant or impudent towards.
gwantisa - cause to be wilful or defiant; make wilful or defiant.
gwantisitse - has caused or made to be wilful, defiant, etc., has made wilful.
gwantisiwa - being caused to be wilful, defiant, etc.
gwantiwa - being defiant impudent, etc.
gwapa - waste; decay [archaic].
gwapalala - (same as "kgwapalala"), lie still; be immobile, as a snake.
gwapile - is wasted or decayed [archaic].
gwara - (same as "retela"), become difficult [archaic].
gwasa - rustle; rustling; make a noise like something going through grass or reeds, or like water falling over stones.
gwasaka - rustle a lot.
gwasisa - cause to rustle.
gwasisitse - has caused to rustle.
gwasitse - has rustled.
gwatêlêla - leave others behind in the pursuit.
gwateletse - has pursued a fleeing person eagerly.
gwaya - beckon or make signs with the hand; pay out.
gwedisa - said of cows and bulls.
gwedisitse - has caused to copulate.
gwedisiwa - being caused to copulate; being made to copulate.
gwediwa - being made to be serviced by a bull.
gwêla - ulate, said of a bull.
gwêlaka - ulate a lot; be virile.
gwelana - ulate.
gweletlha - (same as "gwêrêtlha"), speak in a garbled manner.
gwelwa - said of a cow.
gwêrêtlha - speak about what one does not know or understand; unintentionally distort or confuse facts; garble.
gwêrêtlhaka - speak a lot, or often about what one does not understand or know.
gweretlhile - has misrepresented; has garbled.
gweretlhisa - cause to misrepresent; make someone say things in a confused and illogical manner.
gweretlhisisa - 1nr., cause to be misrepresented; make to say too many things in a confused and illogical manner.
gweretlhisitse - has caused one to speak about what he or she does not know.
gweretlhisiwa - being caused to speak about what one does not know.
gwerisa - cause to copulate.
gwetla - NO Same as /egwetla and letIhabula, autumn; harvest season in traditional life.
gwetla - as a goat; bawl, as a crying child.
gwêtlha - make signs with hands eyes, etc.; signal.
gwetlha - challenge.
gwêtlhaka - beckon a lot, make signs to etc. continuously, frequently.
gwêtlhana - beckon, make signs, etc. at one another.
gwêtlhêga - be attracted to signs or beckonings.
gwêtlhêla - beckon, make signs, ete. for.
gwetlhile - has beckoned; has made signs with hands, eyes, etc.
gwetlhisa - cause to signal; cause to beckon, etc.
gwetlhisitse - has caused to beckon; has made signs, etc.
gwetlhisiwa - (same as "gwetlhiswa"), being caused to make signs; being helped to beckon, ete.
gwetlhiwa - being signalled to with hands, eyes, etc.
gwetsa - bolt food down; swallow after chewing; swallow anything with difficulty.
gwetse - has bolted food down or swallowed after much chewing, or swallowed a thing with difficulty; has serviced, as a bull, a cow.
gwetswe - has been copulated with; has been serviced by a bull.
