ja - used with Ns., PRONS. CL. 14, same as jwa; borotho ja rantlhase, brown bread. ja ping w.expr, pinch. _.
jaaka MAN. comp - conc, like; similar to; batho jaaka rona, people similartous.
jaana - OFT. AND MAN, now; like this; in this manner; thus so. jaanong anv. oFT, now; of time.; jaanong jaana apv., right now; at this very time.
jabeditse - (same as "tsieditse"), has cheated.
jabeditswe - (same as "tsieditswe"), has been cheated.
jabediwa - (same as "tsiediwa being cheated").
jabetsa - cheat.
jadile - (same as "jwadile"), has sown.
jadilwe> - has been sown.
jadisana - cause or help each other to propagate, or sow.
jadisitse - has caused or helped to sow.
jadisiwa - being caused or helped to sow.
jadiwa - (same as "jalwa"), being sown.
jaefa - jive.
jaefe - jive [borrowed].
jafa - wipe away filth [aRcH).
jafile - /Aux., has done rightly, or at the right time; has acted timeously.
jaga - (same as "gatêlêla"), chase; drive as cattle.
jagile - has chased; has driven, as cattle.
jaha - /AUX., Same as jaga, done rightly, or at the right time; acted timeously.
jahaka - rush about.
jahakwa - being rushed much; being much rushed about.
jahêla - rush on behalf of.
jahetse - has rushed on behalf of.
jahilwe - has been rushed.
jahisa - cause to rush.
jahisitse - has caused to rush.
jahisiwa - (same as "jahiswa being caused to hurry").
jahiwa - being hurried.
jajarêga - be in a rage; rage with anger.
jajaregile - was/is in an enraged state; has raged.
jajaregisa - enrage; cause to Tage.
jajaregisitse - was enraged; has caused to rage.
jajaregisitswe - has been caused to rage.
jajaregisiwa - being enraged; being caused to rage.
jajarêgê - 9n., fury; rage.
jaje - (same as "moatlhodi"), dijaje judge [borrowed].
jaka - sojourn for a purpose; sell one's labour for kind, as a labourer who is given a measure of the harvest.
jakêga - sojourn for a purpose and be rewarded.
jakêla - do a job to be paid for in kind.
jakisa - traditionally done by helping at the lands.
jakisitse - has caused one to seek a job for which payment is in kind.
jakisitswe - has been caused to seek a job for which payment is in kind.
jakisiwa - being helped to find employment for which reward is in kind.
jakiwa - being sojourned for a purpose.
jalaka - sow much; sow extensively.
jalakwa - being sown extensively.
jalalana - have sown for each other; give each other grain.
jalalanwa - being sown for each other; mutual exchange of grain for planting.
jalanye - have eaten of each other's food. jale apv.orT.,aforetime; lately; some time ago; then.
jale - (same as "tale mogagolwane"), a shawl; a shoulder blanket.
jalêga - become sown; be well sown.
jalegile - has become sown; is well sown.
jalêla - sow for.
jalêlwa - being sown for.
jaletse - has sown for.
jaletswe - has been sown for. jalo Apv. oF MaN, thus; so; also refers to time past; similar to jale.
jalodisitse - has helped to sow again, or to replant.
jalojalo - etc.; etcetera. jalojalo (j.j.) ADv. oF MAN, and so on; etc.
jalolodisa - help to sow again; replant.
jalolodisitswe - has been helped to sow again, or to replant.
jalolodisiwa - being helped to replant.
jalolola - replant; sow again.
jalololwa - being planted again.
jalolotsê - has resown; has replanted.
jalolotswê - has been sown again.
jalwa - (same as "jadiwa"), being sown.
jana - figuratively, eat each other; have promiscuous sexual intercourse. jana ka mênê 1. Pur, be at loggerheads; quarrel violently.
janêla - have promiscuous sexual intercourse with another's paramour.
janêlwa - being eaten, mutually.
jang - how; why.
jantsha - cause to strike hard against.
jantshana - as swords.
jantshantse - has caused swords, etc., to strike against each other.
jantshanwa - being struck against each other, as swords.
jantshanya - cause swords etc., to strike against each other.
jantshanye - have struck against each other, as swords.
jantshitse - has caused to strike hard against each other, as swords.
jantshitswe - have been caused to strike against each other, as swords.
jantshiwa - being made to strike against each other, as swords.
jantshwanwe - have been struck against each other, as with swords.
janwa - being eaten one by the other. 1. ExPR, janwa ka mêno.
jara - Same as ngwaga, a year [borrowed].
jarata - a yard or compound; yard length of material [borrowed].
jarata - cost per yard, hence price a thing is worth.
jaratisa - determine the selling price per yard.
jase - long coat [borrowed].
jase ya pula - tsa pula raincoat.
je 1STELEM - AND ADJ. conc, similar to le, as in je le rokang, which sews; je lentsho, the black one.
je CL.s - 2Np Pos, same as /e, this, neither near the speaker nor the person spoken to; ke batla je, | want this one.
jêga - edible; become worn out, as clothing; become consumed; be corroded.
jêgêla - êga, be consumed; be completely eaten away, as iron by rust.
jegile - be in a worn-out state. Jehofa n.cx.149-,name of God in Old Testament. jêka_v.s. stp. [borrowed], hoist; jack; lift up, by mechanical means.
jêkê - a jack; a jug [borrowed].
jekegile - has been jacked.
jêkêla - hoist for.
jêkêpôtê - 9N., ING. oF dijêkêpdto jackpot [borrowed].
jeketse - has hoisted for.
jekile - has hoisted.
jekisitse - has caused or helped to hoist.
jekisitswe - has been caused or helped to hoist.
jekisiwa - being caused or helped to hoist.
jekiwa - (same as "jêkwa"), being hoisted.
jekolodisa - help to lower, as a hoist.
jekolodisitse - has helped to lower a jack.
jekolodisitswe - has been helped to lower a jack.
jekolodisiwa - being helped to lower a jack.
jekolola - lower a crane; lower a jack.
jekololwa - being lowered, as a jack or crane.
jekolotsê - has lowered a jack.
jekolotswê - has been lowered, as a jack.
jêla - eat of; eat in. jêla nala 1. pur, visit, or call upon; sojourn at.
jêlana - eat of each other's food.
jêlanwa - being eaten of each other's food.
jêlanwe - have been eaten of each other's food.
jêlanye - have eaten of each other's food.
jele - has eaten.
jeli - dijeli (FoR), jelly.
jêlwa - being eaten of, in, or to.
jelwe - has been eaten.
jêmê - 9%, jam [borrowed].
jênale - ING. oF dijênale, journal [borrowed].
jênêrale - general [borrowed].
jeno CL.s - 3RD Pos, same as me, this, nearer me. jeo cL.sDEM.3RD Pos. same as /eo, that, nearer you.
jeologi - (ror), geology.
jesa - feed; cause or help to eat.
jesi - Same as jeresi jersey; cardigan [borrowed].
jesitse - has fed or helped to eat; has let domestic animals destroy crops in a field; has administered oral poison to a person.
jesitswe - has been given oral poison.
jesiwa - being given oral poison. Jesu N.cL.14¢, sinc. oF boJesu, Jesus, the Christ.
jetse - has eaten of or for; has sown.
jetswe - has been eaten of; has been sown.
jewa - being eaten.
jipi - jeep. jo DEM.2ND Pos, same as bo, equidistant from the speaker and the one spoken to. Joba N.¢-, Job [borrowed].
jokwe - ¢-, AND 9N-, or dijokwe, yokes [borrowed].
jole ct. 14 - 4TH Pos, same as bole, that yonder; bogobê jole, that porridge yonder.
jometeri - geometry [borrowed].
jona CL.14 - 1sT pos, same as jono, this, nearest me. jônê ass. PRON. CL. 14.same as bênê, they; them. jono CL.14DEM.1sT Pos, same as jona, this, nearest me.
joOO CL. 14 - 3RD Pos, same as boo, that, near you.
jorometsa - vomit forcefully. josi quanr. cL. 14, only; only and excluding; bogôbê josi, porridge only; that excluding any other thing. jotlhe cL. 14 Quanr.s, all; the whole.
jukubôkôsê - 99, dijukubêkêsê (ror) juke-box.
jwa_ - CON. USED WITH NS. AND PRONS. CL. 14, Same as ba, same as ja; bogobê jwa me, my porridge.
jwa - (same as "bjwa"), belch.
jwala - sow.
jwatla - (same as "bjwatla"), of breaking.
jwatlêga - become broken; become crushed, as crockery.
jwêjwêlêla - 1p. exer, filter through, as rain through a wall. jwêla_v.s. app. belch; spread, as a skin disease. jwêlêlêla 1p. expr, spread rapidly, as a disease.
