ka - at, on, in, etc., used with adverbs of time and nouns that are used to indicate time; ka moso, tomorrow; ka Sontaga, on Sunday.
ka - at, over, indicating place; ngwedi o tswa ka ditlhare, the moon rises above the trees.
ka - by means of (indicating an instrument) agent or manner of doing with, out of; through, about, from; o tsamaya ka terena, he travels by train; by means of; by or through.
ka - ™M0-, AND SUBJ. CONC. 1ST PERS. SING., Of the main v.,in a multiverb predicate; ka bua, I spoke, as in ke ne ka bua, I spoke, then. n.B. that the DEF. or Vv. s. AUX., OF THE MULTIVERB PRED., May be understood in the context. Note that the ka tla, ka bona, ka tlogêla, are narrative sequence, or what some grammars refer to as the historic or story past.
ka - as; since; because; for; seeing that; ka a gana, seeing that or as he refuses.
ka - may; can; introduces descriptive clauses of time and condition; o ka tsamaya, you may go. ka rorm. which when used together with the v.s. Aux. -bo-, denotes conditional mood: could, should or would, as in re ka bo re bone, we could, should or would have come. ka introduces a variety of cons. pHR.such as ka ntlha ya, because of; ka gobane, because, since; ka gobo, because, since, as; ka gore, because, since, as; ka gonne, because, since, as; ka ke sa ntse ke tshedile, while I am alive.
ka MAN. COMP - motho ka nna, person like me, i.e. a fellow human being, collaborator; motho seka podi, a goat-like person, a Satyr.
ka - o Seka wa bua, do not speak; it is a portmanteau morph. to prop up the nec. formse.
ka - V.S. DEF. 7e, used to denote a definite nec. past, did; ga a a ka a dira, he did not do.
ka - in the potential mood, can, may would, should, could and might; o ka tla, he can come, involving the form: ka.
ka bo v - PHR, would; should; ba ka bo ba dirile, they should have done. ka bomo apv.per.F. < bomo, deliberately; on purpose; purposely.
ka bonakê abv. DER.F - < bonakê, swiftly; hurriedly; quickly. ka bonêlê 'Apv. < bondld, softly; easily; with ease; gently.
ka bonya - < bonya, steadily; slowly.
ka boyo - < boyo, in vain.
ka fa - this way; this side; in this way; in this manner.
ka fa DER - according to.
ka fa ntlê apv - PHR PLA., outside; on the outside; just outside.
ka ga - PHR, about; of; concerning; as for.
ka galê - always.
ka gantsi abv. DER.F - S., tsi, frequently; often; commonly used without the prer. ka.
ka go dira - PHR. OF MAN, by acting.
ka gobo - pHR, because; since.
ka gopê - sepê, never at all; no means; no way of (something) taking place.
ka jeno - < jeno, today; now. ka ke NEG. FORM. PLUS V. S. AUX. POT. MOOD, cannot; may not; might not.
ka kgaga - PHR.OF MAN, urgently; without stopping.
ka mmanene DER - same as ka mannete or ka nnete, the latter two are commonly used; really; truly; verily; of a truth. ka mmanete apv.,same as ka mmanene, truly; verily.
ka moso DER - tomorrow; in the morning, used 1p.it means in the future.
ka one - S, better; preferably that. ka pela apv. DER F. pela, with haste; speedily; quickly; opposite of ka bonya. ka rosi Apv. PL, has an exclusive significance, we alone; us, as against them. ka sewêl6 DER. apv., by luck; by chance; irregularly; very rarely. ka thelelê abv. oF MAN. ambiguously; in a roundabout manner; not plainly.
kaba - ING. oF dikaba, a whisk, for warding off flies, also carried about for ornamental purpose; flower of corn, or grass.
kaba - seal; plug up, or stop a hole; carry on the back behind the neck, as a stick, or gun; carry across the shoulders a thing that is heavy.
kabakajewe - a species of small ground bird.
kabakana - kabakana ka moswang, make a treaty by rubbing each other with the contents of a slaughtered animal's stomach, or by throwing the contents at each other.
kabakantsê - has conjectured; has become suspicious; has wavered in opinion.
kabakanya - ecture; waver; arrange things in an alternative manner.
kabakanye - have come to an agreement; has become uncertain.
kabakany6 - 9N-, conjecturing; reassurance; suspicion.
kabala - similar to kabêga become closed, or plugged, as a leak; be plugged.
kabalan6 - fellowship.
kabama - go by a short route; take a short cut across the country.
kabame - has gone by a short route.
kabamêla - cut across from one point of a circuitous road to another for a purpose.
kabametse - has cut across from one part of a circuitous road to another for: kabanya_v.s: caus. cause to rise, as smoke or dust.
kabanyantsê - has become very distressed.
kabayanya - be very distressed.
kabeditse - (same as "kobeditse similar to taitse"), has milked a cow or goat a second time.
kabediwa - (same as "kobediwa being milked to the last drop"),; being sucked dry.
kabêga - similar to kabala, be plugged as a hole; capable of being carried.
kabegile - has been plugged.
kabeile - has boiled on and on; has cooked for a long time.
kabeisa - cause to boil on and on; cause to be on the boil for some time.
kabeisitse - has caused to be on the boil.
kabeisiwa - being caused to boil on and on.
kabêla - or stop a hole for.
kabêla - transplant seedlings; plant seeds one by one.
kabêlêla - ose doors, etc. against someone; block the entrance so as to prevent coming out.
kabêlêlana - ose doors, etc. against each other.
kabêlêlwa - being locked, or barricaded in to prevent escape.
kabeletse - has locked, or barricaded in, to prevent escape.
kabeletswe - has been locked, or barricaded in, to prevent escape.
kabêl6 - siING. oF dikabêl6, per.r. abêla, a portion; a present; a gift.
kabetla - stnG. oF dikabetla, DIAL. VAR OF kapetla, a fragment of a brown thing.
kabetsa - DIAL. VAR. OF kobetsa, extract last drops of milk from an udder; suck dry; milk to the last drop.
kabisa - cause or help to plug a hole; take turns to carry on the back, or the shoulders.
kabisitse - has caused or helped to plug a hole; has taken turns to carry | something on the back behind the neck.
kabisiwa - being caused or helped to plug a hole; being helped to carry a thing on the back or on the shoulders. |.
kabiwa - being plugged.
kabê - a portion; a division or volume of a book.
kaboga - fall out, or off; become notched > as a knife, or a dish.
kabogile - has fallen out, or off; has become notched, as a knife, or a dish.
kabola - break off a piece, as a mason a stone; cut a stone out of another longer block.
kabole - -, same as tshêsêbê, Damaliscus lunatus.
kabologa - be open; be uncorked; become opened.
kabologile - has become | open; is uncorked.
kabolola - uncork; unplug; unstop. 1p. EXPR, kabolola ditsêbê or ditshôka, punish severely for a misdeed.
kabolotsê - has opened uncorked or unstopped.
kabolotswê - has been opened, uncorked, unplugged or unstopped.
kabotsê - has broken off a piece.
kabotswê - has been broken off.
kabu _ - cooked maize.
kadija - signifies big; huge in size, as kadija wa ndêga.
kadile - has weighed; has assessed; has opened the eyes wide; has hovered with outstretched wings, as a hawk.
kadilwe - has been weighed etc.; have been opened wide, as eyes.
kadimanê6 - ING. oF dikadimand, an item lent mutually.
kadim6 - a borrowing; a loan.
kadisa - cause or help to weigh, or to assess.
kadise - a trench; a place of lying in wait, or ambush [borrowed].
kadisitse - has caused or helped to weigh, or to assess.
kadisiwa - being caused or helped to weigh, or assess.
kadiwa - (same as "kalwa"), being weighed; being assessed.
kae - ADV. OF PLA. AND INTER., where; whither.
kae - how big; how many; how much.
kaedi - index.
kaedisa - help to show the way; help to explain to; show a stranger around.
kaedisitse - has helped to show the way; has helped to explain to, etc.
kaedisiwa - being helped to show the way.
kaeditse - (same as "kaetse"), has shown to; has indicated to.
kaediwa - and kaêla, same as kaetswa, being shown something; have something explained to.
kaêga - capable of being identified, or pointed out to; be tied together, as the legs of a cow for milking.
kaegile - is identified.
kaêla - show to; guide; instruct; direct; instruct on how to, etc.
kaêlana - show one another something; instruct one another; tie a cow's legs together for milking.
kaêlêga - be successfully instructed; capable of being instructed successfully; capable of following instructions.
kaêlêla - talk without effect; do something with a purpose of; commend without good cause; speak of a person better than he deserves.
kaeletse - has talked without effect, etc.
kaêl6 - instruction; instructing by example; guidance; counselling.
kaetsa' - show around; explain the workings of (something); show to; point out to.
kaetse - has shown around; has instructed, guided or directed, etc.
kaetswe - has been shown; has been instructed to, etc.
kagis6 - peace.
kag6 - the process of building; a building or construction.
kagê ee godileng - a building that is high or tall.
kaidile - (same as "kaitsê wandered").
kaidisa - cause to wander about.
kaidisitse - has made to wander about.
kaidisiwa - being made to wander about lost.
kaila - be hemmed in; be unable to find a path; wander about lost.
kailaka - wander about very helplessly; be hopelessly unable to find the way.
kailakaila - wander about a lot.
kaile - has described; has mentioned; has counted as, etc.
kailêla - or from.
kailwe - has been described; has been mentioned.
kaitsane - DER, Same as aitsane, surely; verily.
kaitso - traditional perfume from roots of powdered grass.
kaiwa - etc.; being described; being mentioned.
kaiwa - as the legs of a cow, for milking.
kaka - be drawn two ways; be engrossed in, hindered, or overcome by, work; be without leisure.
kakabala - lie with arms and legs stretched out.
kakabalê - sin. oF dikakabalê, doubt; perplexity; bewilderment; distraction.
kakabetse - has lain with arms and legs stretched out.
kakabologa - (same as "kakamologa"), be separated; hold oneself aloof from.
kakabologile - (same as "kakamologile"), has been separated.
kakabolola - make to part; bend back so as to open, as a book.
kakabolosa - cause to be separated, etc.
kakabolositse - has caused to be separated, etc.
kakabolosiwa - being caused to separate, etc.
kakabolotsê - has separated; has bent back so as to open, as a book.
kakafala - become obstinate, or stubborn.
kakafetse - has become obstinate, or stubborn.
kakalepa - become corrupted, or demoralised.
kakalepile - or demoralised.
kakama - carry with both hands.
kakamala - pause in speech through failure of memory.
kakamara - support in the arms; lift up, carry, or hold a thing in the arms or between both hands.
kakame - has carried with both hands.
kakamere - has supported in the arms; has lifted up, carried, or held, a thing in the arms or between hands.
kakamologa - (same as "kakabologa"), become separated; hold oneself aloof from.
kakamologile - (same as "kakabologile"), become separated, etc.
kakamolola - pull to one side, as a badly trained ox.
kakamolotsê - has pulled to one side, as a badly trained ox.
kakainolotswê - has been pulled to one side, as by a badly trained ox.
kakana - a wart; a pipe, hence a toddler's private parts when referred to playfully.
kakanngwa - being related, or narrated; being told.
kakantsê - has informed; has declared; has made known.
kakantswê - has been told news; has been informed.
kakanyeditse - has related to; has declared to.
kakanyetsa - ate to; declare to.
kakany6 - a thought; an idea.
kakanyêthe - theory.
kakapa - ADV. OFT. [archaic], at the present time.
kakara - or more than one has permission to take.
kakaretsa - same as akaretsa, which is more commonly used; taken as a whole; estimate.
kakaretso - inclusion; generality. | kakatla pri. InTERJ, of holding tight instantly.
kakatlêla - kakatla, hold.very tight.
kakatlêlwa - being held very tight.
kakatletse - has held very tight.
kakatletswe - has been held very tight.
kakatlolola - help a person to rise; take hold of in order to lift up.
kakatlolotsê - has raised; j has helped a person to rise, etc.
kakê - ¢-., all species of cobra, including the ringhals; the headman of bogwêra ceremony.
kakêga - become overcome; or held by or hindered by work; be very busy; be perplexed.
kakegile - has been overcome; is held by, or hindered, etc. |.
kakêl6 - 9N-, (Dj, obedience.
kakeloga - disobedience.
kakere - has taken a lot, or more than one has permission to take.
kaketlane - tiger cat.
kaketso - deception; lying.
kakgaakgêg6_ - n., doubt.
kaki - N., ING. oF dikaki, khaki [borrowed].
kakile - has become too much to cope with; has overburdened one.
kakilwe - has been worn out, or exhausted, as by work.
kakisa - cause to be engrossed; make busy.
kakisitse - has caused to be engrossed; has made busy.
kakisiwa - being kept busy, or engrossed.
kak6 - ING. a lie (the process rather than the product); lying.
kakoba - keep at a distance through fear; turn aside through fear; fear to approach.
kakobaka - fear to approach one another.
kakobana - keep each other at a distance; look at each other suspiciously, questionably, or arrogantly.
kakobane - have kept each other at a distance; have looked at each other suspiciously, questionably, or arrogantly.
kakobêga - be feared and kept away from; be suspect.
kakobêla - at a distance for.
kakobile - has kept at a distance through fear; has turned aside through fear.
kakobisitse - has caused or helped to keep at a distance through fear.
kakobisiwa - being caused or helped to keep at a distance through fear.
kakobiwa - being kept at a distance through fear.
kakof6 - haste.
kakologa - avoid; pass at a distance; keep at a distance from.
kakologile - has avoided; has passed at a distance; has kept at a distance from.
kakwa - being engrossed in, or hindered, or overcome by work; being without leisure.
kala - a confidential servant, this meaning is being gradually replaced by confidant, or friend; a branch of a tree; the rhinoceros bird. prov., kala tsa more re babedi, nnaha motho wa boraro o tswa kae.
kala - weigh; assess the value of.
kala - open the eyes wide; hover with outstretched wings, as a hawk.
kalabana - as smoke or dust.
kalabantsê - has risen up, as smoke or dust.
kalabanye - has caused to rise up, as smoke or dust.
kalabua - a seedpod of a thorn tree or bush.
kalafi_ - treatment.
kalaf6 - a cure.
kalaka - lime.
kalakatlêga - wander, as a bull in search of cows; be rampant and unchecked.
kalakatlegile - has ran about here and there; has sought a thing here and there.
kalakatlegisa - make to run about hither and thither, etc.
kalakatlegisitse - has caused to run about here and there.
kalakatlegisiwa - being caused to run here and there.
kalala - 1nt. < kala, gaze hard, or stare.
kalalêla - stare at; look hard at.
kalaletse - has stared at; has looked at.
kalameditse - has drunk quickly; has swallowed a liquid quickly.
kalametsa - drink quickly; swallow a liquid quickly; kodumetsa is the form that is commonly used. kalana pi. or kala, a little branch.
kalane - navel.
kalantlheng apv - PHR, Same as kalantlha, rarely used, at the very beginning. kalanyana pi. oF kalana, a twig.
kalaotêga - either through preference or wandering.
kalapa - skip about, as young animals; jump with joy.
kalasêtê - subset.
kaledisa - help a thing to hang down.
kaleditse - has hanged; has caused to hang.
kaleditswe - has been hanged.
kalediwa - be hanged.
kalêga - be tired of looking; become blurred; become weighed.
kalegile - has become tired of looking. kalêgê_N. cL. 9N-, SING, a failing eyesight.
kalêla - look upon; gaze earnestly at; make it difficult to go on owing to some hindrance; weigh or assess for; be suspended from, as a rag from a tree; hang down.
kaleletsa - hang for.
kalêlwa - being hanged.
kalema - prance, as a horse.
kalemile - has pranced, as a horse.
kalem6 - 9N-, prancing.
kaletsa - cause to hang; kill by hanging.
kaletse - has looked upon, has gazed earnestly upon, etc.; is hanging, as a rag on a tree branch.
kaletsêga - become hanged; be raised.
kalo - S., so much; so big; as much; as big as that. n.B. when used with ka as a pref, the resultant word becomes an Apv. signifying number of times.
kaloga - (of the eyes); disappear, as a thing at a distance.
kalogêla - become dim; disappear, as a thing at a distance.
kalogile - has become dim; is dim.
kalola - dazzle, with a bright confusing light.
kaloma - bite without making deep incisions.
kalomile - has bitten without making deep incisions.
kalos6 - graduation.
kalotsê - has dimmed; has dazzled with bright confusing light.
kalotswê - being dazzled by a bright confusing light.
kama - conical piece of ay toy with hollowed ends which, when skilfully thrown into water, makes a smooth noiseless dip, hence lo ntse jaaka kama, you have hit the mark, or spoken truly.
kama - comb.
kamagany6 - a touching of each other.
kamakama - fill one's arms to capacity with things; have one's arms full; hug.
kamakamile - (same as "kumakumile"), has carried lots and lots of things in the arms.
kamalala - be stubborn; speak frankly.
kamaletse - is stiff of body etc.
kaman6 - in touch with.
kamatlêla - embrace.
kamêga - become perplexed; become combed; become neat and tidy.
kamegile - be perplexed; be at a loss as to what to do; be combed, or neat and tidy.
kamêla - camel [borrowed].
kamêla - comb for, or be neat and tidy for; perplex; put at a loss; show off.
kamile - has combed; has perplexed; has "put at a loss.
kamisa - cause or help to comb; cause to perplex; cause to boast; make proud.
kamisitse - has caused or helped to comb; has caused to perplex; made boastful.
kamisiwa - being caused or helped to comb; being caused to boast.
kamiwa - being boastful; being proud.
kam6 - a touch.
kam@6 - comb [borrowed].
kamoga - swell, particularly of the eye.
kamoganê6 - @mogana, a reciprocation of gifts; a deprivation, by taking away from each other.
kamogêlê - reception; a receipt, of wages, or holy communicn, etc.
kamologa - be uncombed; become unkempt.
kamologile - has become unkempt; has become uncombed.
kamolola - uncomb; make shabby or unkempt.
kamololwa - being made uncombed; being dishevelled.
kamolotsê - was uncombed; was unkempt.
kamore - Same as phapose, a chamber; a room [borrowed].
kampa - encampment; a police station; a place where troops, etc., are encamped [borrowed].
kampa - encamp; station; embrace with arms; spread the arms around; clasp with arms.
kampana - struggle with each other; wrestle, in a literal or figurative sense.
kampantsê - has caused to wrestle.
kampanya - cause to wrestle.
kampanye - have struggled with each other; have wrestled with each other.
kampeditse - drank quickly; swallowed liquid quickly.
kampêga - become encamped.
kampegile - has set up camp successfully.
kampêla - set up camp for.
kampetsa - drink quickly; swallow liquid quickly.
kampetse - has set up camp for.
kampile - has camped.
kampisitse - has caused or helped to camp.
kampisiwa - being caused or helped to camp.
kampo - (same as "kgampo"), perhaps.
kampolola - abandon camp; finish camping; come to an end of camping.
kamuga - (same as "kamoga"), swell particularly of the eye.
kana - whether... or.
kana - incidentally; oh; what.
kana - s.,So much; so big; as much as this; as big as this.
kana - seal; cement; stop holes with cement; squeeze an insect between the fingernails.
kanama - lie on one's back.
kanamêga - become possible to lie on one's back.
kanamêla - 's back for.
kanametse - has lain on one's back for.
kanamisa - 's back.
kanamisitse - has caused or made to lie on one's back.
kanamisiwa - being caused or made to lie on one's back.
kanamiwa - being laid back.
kanam6 - a spreading.
kanamologa - become upright, that is, change from lying on one's back.
kanamolola - make upright that which was lying down; cause to get up from ying. on the back.
kanamolotsê - has atie something not to lie on its back.
kanangwa - (same as "kanamiwa"), being lain back.
kanany6 - a change; exchanging or bartering.
kane - can [borrowed].
kanêga - to put something on its back.
kanegile - has put something on its back.
kanêg6 - a putting out to dry.
kanêl6 - a narration; a novel.
kang - ADV. SHORT FORM OF ka eng; by what about what.
kangwa - being perplexed; being combed.
kaniri - hinge.
kanka - muse.
kankabeditse - has sounded the depth.
kankabetse - sound the depth; ascertain the extent or size; attempt the impossible.
kankabets6 - 9N-, measurement; finiteness.
kankase - an oar.
kankere - cancer.
kannê - has sealed; has cemented; has killed an insect by squeezing it between the fingernails.
kanngwa - being perplexed.
kannwê - has been sealed, etc.
kan6 - a story.
kanoka - scrutinise; examine in detail.
kanokile - has examined in detail.
kanolola - unstop.
kanolotsê - has unsealed; has unstopped. kanta_N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dikanta {FoR}, pleat; hem.
kante - by the way; in truth; incidentally who?.
kantêlêla - ose a door tightly.
kanteletse - has closed a door tightly.
kanti - 9N-, (For), tin; bucket; drum; same as kantini.
kantini - (same as "kanti").
kantêr6 - Office [borrowed].
kantsê - has become tight, as a barrel which no longer leaks; has killed with a stroke; has restrained speech.
kantsêga - die suddenly without previous illness.
kantsegile - has died suddenly without previous illness.
kanwa - being sealed; being squeezed between fingernails, as an insect.
kanya - beat or strike with one stroke; overcome with one word; be tight.
kany6 - a Stroke. kaôê_N. SING., SHORT FORM OF mokad, rope used for fastening cows' legs when being milked.
kaolodisa - cause or help to unfasten, etc.
kaolodisitse - has caused or helped to unfasten, ete.
kaolodisiwa - being caused or helped to unfasten, etc.
kaologa - separate or disperse, as a crowd; become broken up, as clouds, mist, fog; become unfastened, as an animal's legs which have been tied together.
kaologile - have separated, or dispersed, as a crowd, mist, fog, etc.
kaololêla - disperse for; unfasten for.
kaololêlwa - being unfastened for.
kaololetse - has dispersed for; has unfastened for.
kaololwa - being separated, or dispersed, etc., by an agent.
kaolosa - make beer or sour milk less sharp in taste, or weaker, etc., by adding water; dilute.
kaolositse - has caused beer or sour milk to be less sharp in taste, etc.; has weakened the strength of something by diluting it.
kaolosiwa - (same as "kaoloswa being caused to be weaker in strength"), etc., by the addition of water.
kaolotsê - has caused to disperse, as clouds, fog, dust, etc.; has unfastened, as an animal's legs which had been tied together.
kaowa - (same as "kaua"), same as katlolwa, being fastened, as an animal's legs which have been tied together.
kapa - the Cape Province or Cape Town both in the R.S.A.
kapa - asp; catch in the hand; take a photograph of; acquire, as a new culture trait, e.g. Christianity; arrest.
kapaka - catch a lot of things in the hands.
kapakapa - catch things in the hand repeatedly.
kapana - catch each other with both hands when taking turns to fall from a height.
kaparê - way of dressing; dress fashion.
kapeditse - drink by using the hand as a cup.
kapêga - caught in the hand.
kapegile - was successfully caught in the hand.
kapei - (same as "kaped"), cookery; cooking.
kapêla - catch, in the hand; catch for.
kapê6 - (same as "kapei"), cookery; cooking.
kapetla - fragment of a broken thing; water turned to a piece of ice.
kapetlana - but used as a variant of kapetla, fragment of a broken thing; water turned to a piece of ice.
kapetsa - drink by using the hand as a cup; swallow quickly.
kapi \ - sun hat.
kapile' - has caught.
kapisa - cause or help to catch a flying object.
kapoko - snow; sleet, same as sefokaboleya (an onomatopoeic name) or /etlhwa [borrowed].
kara - a four-wheeled vehicle; SHORT FORM OF mmotokara; separate cream from milk by churning.
karabôê - an answer to a call; a reply to a letter; a reaction.
karagana - frolic; prance; make a clacking noise, as the hoofs of running animals.
karaganêla - frolic for; prance for, etc.
karagantsê - has frolicked for; has pranced for.
karaganya - frolick or prance, as a young animal.
karaganye - has frolicked; has made a clacking noise, as the hoofs of running animals.
karaki - donkey cart.
karakule - -, a breed of sheep; karakul [borrowed].
karaladisa - (same as "karalatsa"), fit; make stiff.
karaladisitse - has made stiff; to have a fit.
karaladisiwa - being made to have a fit.
karalala - be stiff; to have a fit.
karalalê - a faint; a fit; an epileptic fit.
karalalwa - having a fit.
karalatsa - make stiff.
karaletse - has had a fit; has fainted.
karaletswe - being in a fit.
karapa - scrape or shave off hair from an animal using hot water, before cooking.
karapi - a hook-like instrument used for drawing honey out of a hive.
karara - deceit; pretence.
karata - card.
karate - karate [borrowed].
karatšhe - (FoR) garage.
karetla - roar; growl; make a rumbling noise; commonly used form is kurutla.
karetlile - has roared; has growled; has made a rumbling noise.
kariki - 9N-, a two-wheeled animal-drawn vehicle; cart.
karê - surgical operation.
karolê - a branch or section of anything, e.g. a tribe, fruit, chapter, etc.
kase - Same as [shise cheese [borrowed].
kasetorone - a saucepan; a porcelain pot [borrowed].
kata - smear or plaster the floor or wall with soil to leave the surface looking and feeling rough but even; tramp, or trample, as loose soil; kill lice against the head with the thumbnail; becoming trained or broken in, as a riding or draught animal.
kata - Similar to disa, guard; watch over.
katagana - crowd together, as people ina hall.
kataka - be on the retreat; keep moving back; trample on very much, as a crowd on a piece of ground.
katakalana - tread or trample on each other.
katakanye - have trodden or trampled on each other.
katakasima - (FOR) catechism; catechism ass.
katakata - move back a few steps at a time.
katakêla - as a crowd or a person on the ground; stamp on ground to make it firm.
kataketse - has trampled on.
katana - guard each other; a piece of cloth round the loins, same as sekatana.
katara - guitar.
katêgêla - êga, become filled up, as a well with mud; be silted up.
kategetse - has become filled up, as a well with mud; has silted up.
kategile - has become trapped etc.
katêla - become broken in for; fill up a pool or hollow with earth.
katêlwa - be in the process of being filled up.
katerolo - pulley [borrowed].
kateseditse - has filled up a pool, etc., with debris.
katesetsa - fill up a pool, etc. with earth; to the detriment of.
katetswe - has been filled up as a pool, etc., with earth.
kati - a sleeping place or hollow of wild animals; a trough in the ground for cattle to drink from.
katisa - break in; help to guard.
katlanôê - kissing each other.
katlhabalê - 9N-, breadth.
katlham6 - width; also boatlhamê.
katlhamolosê - ber. F. atlhamolosa, a widening; a broadening, or broad opening.
katlhol6 - a decision; a judgment.
katl6 - a kiss; kissing.
katloa - (same as "kaiwa"), tie a cow's legs together.
katloko - 9N-, cross-examine.
katlolola - 's legs; stretch out as cloth in sewing.
katoga - move back; move a little distance away.
katogana - move away from each other.
katoganya - cause to move from one another.
katoganye - be at a distance from each other.
katogêla - retire to a distance from; move back from.
katogile - has moved back; has moved aside.
katologa - become as if untrained; degenerate.
katologa - be exposed, as a hidden object; be unearthed.
katologana - become estranged from each other; be apart; be at a distance from one another.
katologanye - have become estranged from each other.
katolosa - make bigger or wider.
katosa - cause to move back; make to rove a little distance away.
katositse - has moved back.
katse - cat [borrowed].
kaua - (same as "kaiwa"), tie the legs of a cow, for milking.
kausu _ - sock.
kawa - a bag or other receptacle for bulbs or fruit.
kaweldê - have abdominal distension.
kaya - describe; point out; distinguish; regard as; esteem as; know as; mean; aim with a gun; ba mo kaya fae le kgosi, they regard him as a chief.
kaya - point out; show.
kaya - (same as "katloa"), tie a cow's legs together as for milking. kê pouire imp. FORM. denotes polite wish, ke kê ke utlwê, please let me understand.
ke - PREF. FoRM, indicating an agent, signifies by, as in go dirilwe ke nna, it was done by me.
ke - V.S. USED IN NEG. constructions to denote are not used to, or are not accustomed to or not in the habit of, as in ga ba ke ba bua, they are not used to talk.
ke - M0- AND 1Ag- SUBJ. CONC. (SHORT FORM), ke bua thata, I speak a lot.
ke - denotes must, as in a ke re bowê must we return? ke NON. V. PRED. FORM. OR IMP. IDENT. COP. FORM., denotes it is; they are; ke ngwana, it is a child; k'e dikgomo, they are cattle; opposite of se. ke NON. V. PRED. FORM. OR PERS. IDENT. COP. FORM, denotes I, as inke motho, I am a person; ke mokwadi, I am a writer.
ke a - /10- AND 1Ao-, SUBJ. CONC. (LONG FORM) ke a bua, I speak, or I am speaking.
ke gênê - PRON, therefore; wherefore.
ke mang - PHR., who is it?.
ke mong - PHR., what sex, i.e. is it male or female? ke ne ke v. pur, denotes past tense, I was; ke ne ke kwala, I was writing.
kêba - be weak, as thickly growing corn; unable to calve well, as a cow, etc.
kêbê - a babble or noisy sound.
kebeditse - (same as "kobeditse has milked a cow dry").
kêbêkêbê - a noisy babble, or confused sound, as of many people speaking together.
kebetsa - (same as "kobetsa"), milk a cow dry.
kebile - has weakened, etc.; has been unable to calve well.
kêêtane - chain [borrowed].
kekeditse - smoulder.
kêkêla_ - become big, as a tumour.
kêkêla - cackle, as a hen in search of a place in which to make a nest.
kêkêla - êla, smoulder; spread, as fire without flame; spread, as a sore.
kêkêlala - worsen; become worse.
kêkêta - gnaw or cut through; bite or cut to make dents.
kêkêtana - hurt each other, by making wounds in each other.
kêkêtêla - gnaw or cut through for.
keketile - has gnawed or cut through.
keketisa - cause to be gnawed or cut through.
keketisitse - has caused to be gnawed or cut through.
keketisiwa - being caused to be gnawed or cut through; being gnawed or cut through much.
keketiwa - being gnawed or cut through.
keketsa - make worse, as a tear, or sickness.
keketsêga - become worse, as sickness, or a tear, etc.
keketsegile - has become worse, as sickness, or a tear.
kelabêla - follow in line.
kelamêlê - 9N-, help or support; to give help.
kelamê - similar to botsetsi, confinement; a lying in after childbirth; sitting on eggs to hatch them.
kelebetse - followed or has followed in line.
keledi - a tear (eye).
kêlêka - examine carefully either by touch or by looking into; search intently.
kêlêkaka - examine much carefully. kêlêkana y.s. REC, examine each other closely, either by touch or by looking.
kêlêkêga - be examined closely; be successfully examined.
kelekegile - has been examined closely.
kêlêkêla - examine carefully for.
keleketlile - or flowed on continually.
keleketlo - an overflow; an issue.
kêlêk6 - 99-, siING. oF dikêlêkê, review. kêlêlêl6_N. attention; carefulness; attentiveness; observance.
kêlêl6_ - 9N-, a small stream; a water furrow. kêlêra_v.s. simp., wave to and fro.
keletso - a desire; a wish.
kêlôtlhôk6 - 9n-, and tlhdkê attention. kêma_N.a patch or strip cut or shaved off from the forehead to the middle of the forehead.
kêmalanê - variance; contention.
kêmêlêl6 - 9N-, importunity.
kêm6 - height; status.
kêmêphôs6 - offside.
kenelala - (same as "paralala"), stretch out.
keneletse - has stretched out.
kenenyane - a short-horned rhinoceros.
keng - a stranger, used of animals.
kenoga - be changeable or inconstant.
kenogêla - be changeable or inconstant for.
kenogile - has changed; has been inconstant.
kênta - (same as "tlhaba"), inoculate; inject; vaccinate.
kentaka - inoculate, inject, or vaccinate a lot.
kêntana - inoculate, inject, or vaccinate one another.
kêntêga_ - become inoculated, etc.
kentegile - has become inoculated, etc.
kêntêla - inject, or vaccinate for.
kêntilwe - be inoculated.
kentisa - cause or help to inoculate, etc.
kentisitse - has caused to inoculate, etc.
kentisiwa - being caused or helped to inoculate.
kentiwa - etc.
keolola - (same as "katolola"), take out, or push out sand when digging a hole.
keolotsê - or pushed out sand when digging.
kêpêsê - 90-, cap [borrowed].
kêp6 - digging.
kepu - a pointed stick or instrument for digging.
kerafo - 99-, (FoR), graph.
kêrê - (For), gear of a car.
kêrêkê - 90-, church [borrowed].
kêrêmpê - cramp [borrowed].
kêrêsê - candle [borrowed].
keresemose - Christmas [borrowed].
keretšhe - kindergarten; nursery school [borrowed].
keriba - wheelbarrow. Keriši N., grease [borrowed].
kêsê - gas [borrowed].
kesi - coffin; trunk [borrowed].
kêta - worry; play a game of addition and subtraction using stones called dikêtd, hence play games.
kêtapele - a forerunner; the foreword; an introduction.
ketefala - become heavy or difficult.
kêtêga - capable of being played, as a game in which stones are used.
ketegile - successfully played, as a game with stones.
keteka - bruise severely; wound by bruising severely.
keteka - celebrate.
ketekile - etc.
ketekilwe - be very bruised e.g. o ketekilwe, he is or has been very bruised; has been bruised severely.
kêtêla - êtê, for. preceding; leading; leadership.
ketetsopele - introduction.
ketisa - êto.
ketisitse - has helped or caused to play an addition and subtraction game with stones called dikêtd.
ketisiwa - being helped or caused to play with dikêto.
ketiwa - êtd.
ketla - a fragment of a broken thing; /eketlo is more commonly used.
ketleets6 - 9N-, preparation; a gift prepared beforehand; an encouragement to do.
ketlele - -, kettle [borrowed].
ketloga - become chipped, as chinaware.
ketlogile - has become chipped; is chipped.
ketlola - halve; chip, as chinaware when carelessly handled.
ketoga - (same as "kwetoga"), come into view; appear above the horizon, as a cloud.
ketso - imitation.
kga - 00ze out, as blood from a wound; exude, as juice from overripe fruit.
kgaa_ - (same as "aba"), apportion; give or distribute; exclaiming to show disapproval, of someone being indecently exposed, or having broken wind.
kgaba - a curse believed to be brought upon by a relative's ill feeling towards another, the result being having one misfortune after another.
kgaba - dress elegantly or smartly; show off.
kgabagantsê - has crossed over.
kgabagantshitse - has caused to cross over.
kgabaganya - cross Over.
kgabaganyeditse - < kgabaganyetsa crossed over.
kgabaganyetsa - cross Over.
kgabagare - ADV. OFT. afterwards; at length; in a little while; at last.
kgabakgaba - boil, as a pot of beans; simmer.
kgabakgabêla - boil or simmer for.
kgabakgabisa - as does a pot of beans.
kgabakgabisitse - has been caused to simmer.
kgabakgabisiwa - being caused to boil, as does a pot of beans.
kgabala - fruit of mogabala plant.
kgabana - baby's umbilical cord.
kgabatlolêga - be always on the move.
kgabatlolegile - has gadded about; was always on the move.
kgabekwane - a species of small bird.
kgabetla - cut into portions in a rough manner; break up news in an under manner, or tell it in piecemeal fashion.
kgabetlaka - cut many things into very small or very large pieces.
kgabetlêla - cut up meat very finely for; chop up anything into very small pieces for.
kgabetletse - has minced meat for.
kgabetlile - has minced.
kgabetlisa - cause or help to cut into portions, etc.
kgabetlisitse - has caused or helped to cut into portions.
kgabetlisiwa - being caused or helped to cut into portions, etc.
kgabetse - dressed elegantly for; has dressed elegantly for.
kgabisa - to beautify; garnish; cause to be arrayed. a.
kgabisitse - has beautified, etc.
kgabisiwa - being beautified; being made beautiful, etc.
kgabis6 - an ornament; a decoration.
kgabiwa - < being elegantly dressed.
kgabo - monkey; flame (of fire). np. totem of Bakgatla.
kgabodisa - cause or help to visit for a short while.
kgaboisa - (same as "poraemasetôf6"), primus stove.
kgabola - visit for a short while; make periodic visits.
kgabolaka - make periodic visits frequently.
kgabolêla - or of.
kgaboletse - has made a periodic visit.
kgabotlolêga - boil thoroughly.
kgabotsê - has visited for a short while.
kgabuka - make many wounds by stabbing.
kgabukile - has stabbed many times.
kgadi - commonly known as khadi, an alcoholic drink prohibited by law.
kgadiepeditse - has treated harshly by word or deed.
kgadiepetsa - treat harshly by word or deed.
kgadika - a piece of meat or fat that is overfried; fat or meat that is burnt.
kgadikêg6 - stomach ache; gripe.
kgadile - has dried up, as water in a well; also to abuse, or revile, hence has abused.
kgadisa - cause to dry up.
kgadubane - AND 9N-, and dikgadubane, turtle.
kgaê - expression of surprise.
kgaedisa - make into a spent force.
kgaedisitse - has made a spent force.
kgaedisiwa - being made a spent force.
kgaeditse - has made a spent force.
kgaediwa - being made a spent force.
kgaêla - become a spent force.
kgafêla - taxation.
kgaga - a scaly ant-eater; a species of armadillo.
kgagakgaga - a den in the hills.
kgagamalê - urgency; importunity.
kgagapa - brace.
kgagap6 - extortion; usury.
kgagetla - see kgaketla, which is commonly used, a piece of thin ice; a piece of broken plate, etc.
kgagoga - be torn.
kgai - (same as "khai"), a piece of oth, etc.
kgailôê - a killing off; a slaughter; a massacre.
kgaisanôê - competition.
kgaitsadi - AND 9N-, Same as kgantsadi and dikgaitsadi, sibling of the opposite sex; a sister; a brother.
kgaitsadiaka - (same as "kgantsadiaka"), my brother; my sister.
kgaitsadiê - AND 9N-, and dikgaitsadiê, same as kgantsadiê, his/her brother; his/her sister.
kgaitsadid - AND 9N-, and dikgaitsadi6, your brother; your sister.
kgajajêga - rage; be furious; speak loudly in anger; cry bitterly; trumpet, as an angry elephant.
kgajajegile - has raged; has become furious. kgajajêgôê_N. cL.9N., SING. oF dikgajajêgôê and kgakgatsêgd, rage; fury; trumpeting, as an angry elephant; a shout of rage; a bitter cry of rage.
kgajane - the hawk eagle; a guard of initiates in the bogwêra (rcumcision), ceremony. ~.
kgajê - the chief of the bogwêra (rcumcision), camp.
kgaka_ - a guinea fowl. pRoV., kgakapedi ga di robale mosima o le mongwefeêla.
kgakafala - be far. kgakala ap), far. kgakala apv. PLA, far.
kgakalanyana - (same as "kgakajana"), a short distance; not very far.
kgakal6 - anger; annoyance; indignantion; earnestness; vehemence.
kgakamose - revolution.
kgakatsêg6_ - vehemence; indignation.
kgakats6 - a provoking; a making angry.
kgakgabaditse - has laid waste; has made desolate, etc.
kgakgabalê - a desolation; a waste.
kgakgabatsa - make desolate; cause to dry up; parch, or make dry.
kgakgabats6 - a laying waste; a making desolate.
kgakgabuêga - become rash.
kgakgabuegile - has become rash.
kgakgabuêg6 - rashness.
kgakgabuetse - has spoken or acted rashly.
kgakgafaditse - has made impudent.
kgakgafaditswe - has been made impudent.
kgakgafala - become impudent.
kgakgafatsa - make impudent.
kgakgafetse - has become impudent.
kgakgala - dried and stale food.
kgakgamalê - a wondering; a surprise.
kgakgamats6 - a surprising event; a wonder.
kgakgamodisa - help or cause to dismantle.
kgakgamodisiwa - being helped to dismantle.
kgakgamoditse - has caused or helped to dismantle.
kgakgamologa - fall apart; become dismantled.
kgakgamologana - be at variance; strife among each other.
kgakgamologane - is at variance; strife among each other.
kgakgamologan6 - 9N-, variance; strife.
kgakgamologanya - < kgakgamologê cause strife between.
kgakgamologany6 - a strife.
kgakgamologêla - fall apart for; become dismantled for.
kgakgamolola - destroy; dismantle.
kgakgamololêla - destroy for; dismantle for.
kgakgamololetse - has destroyed for.
kgakgamosi - whitish-blue moist sharp smoke, akin to carbon monoxide.
kgakgana - small species of tortoise.
kgakgatha - boil and bubble up. kgakgathêgêla per F, kgakgatha, adhere to, as dirt to clothes.
kgakgathegetse - has adhered to, as dirt to clothes.
kgakgathêla - boil and bubble up for.
kgakgathetse - has boiled and bubbled up for.
kgakgathisa - cause to boil and bubble up.
kgakgathisitse - caused to boil and bubble up.
kgakgathisiwa - being caused to boil and bubble up.
kgakgathologa - < kgakgatha become reboiled and bubbled up.
kgakge - 9s-, wonder; astonishment. Ip. EXxPR.go ja kgakge, to be astonished.
kgakodisa - cause or help to have a housewarming, etc.
kgakoga - be tried out, as a new thing; be put to the test, as a new pot when something is cooked in it for the first time.
kgakola - cook something in a new pot; try out something new; dedicate a new thing.
kgakolêla - as a new thing for.
kgakoletse - has tried out a new thing for.
kgakolodi_ - 90-, dikgakolodi notebook.
kgakologêl6 - a memory; a thought.
kgakolol6 - advice; counsel; reminder.
kgakotsê - has had a housewarming.
kgala - a distance; an amount of corn sufficient to fill a stamping block.
kgala - abuse; deny; revile; rail at; condemn; reproach; scold; become parched; dry up, as a fountain, or river, etc.; cease dripping.
kgalabua - the pod of the thorn tree.
kgaladua - blister beetle. Kgalagadi N.A0-, dry up and -gadi, argumentative sur. meaning great: The waterless territory between Botswana and Namibia.
kgalahetwa - an erect/decumbent herb arising from a thick tuberous tree, Portulacaceae.
kgalakis6 - 9N-, provocation; angering.
kgalalap6 - an opening or glade in a forest, etc.; something appearing on the other side of a river, as a tree, a house, etc.
kgalalêlê - 9n-, dikgalalêlê, a shining; a glare; glory (subjective).
kgalalets6 - ING. oF dikgalaletsd, a glorifying; glory (objective).
kgalapotsane - a mythical snake which cries like a goat kid.
kgalê - ADV. OFT, DIAL. same as galê and hiagdlogolo, formerly; in times past; also name of a hill in Botswana.
kgalefê - anger; wrath.
kgalêga - becoming dried up; becoming abused, reviled, etc.; be thirsty.
kgalema - speak angrily; talk or scold; chide, hence the sharp barking by a baboon.
kgalemaka - scold a lot; chide a lot, etc.
kgalemana - scold one another; chide each other.
kgalemêga - respond positively to being scolded.
kgalemêla - chide for, etc.
kgalemetse - has chided; has scolded, ete.
kgalemile - has reprimanded.
kgalemisa - help or cause to speak angrily or to scold.
kgalemisitse - has helped or caused to speak angrily, etc.
kgalemisiwa - being helped or caused to speak angrily.
kgalemiwa - < being chided; being scolded.
kgalem6 - a rebuke; a reprimand; a scolding.
kgalê - abuse; reviling; railing.
kgalola - herb that is given to a dog to make it fierce.
kgama - hartebeest. prov., go lelêla kgara le mogogoro.
kgama - throttle; choke.
kgamarêg6 - pause in doubt.
kgamatha - (same as "kganatha"), become smeared, or bleared, or smudged, as clothes by mud, or face and eyes by weeping.
kgamathala - become dirty or smudged.
kgamathêla - become dirty or smudged for.
kgamathetse - has become dirty or smudged for.
kgamathile - has become smeared or bleared, etc.
kgamêga - have sore throat; be unable to swallow; become throttled; be choked.
kgamegile - has suffocated; has become throttled.
kgamêla - throttle for; choke for.
kgamêlana - throttle one another for.
kgamêl6 - a milking vessel; a bucket.
kgametse - has throttled for.
kgamisa - cause or help to choke, etc.
kgamisitse - has caused or helped to choke.
kgamisiwa - being caused or helped to choke.
kgamiwa - being choked; being throttled.
kgam6 - a milking.
kgamolola - pull or tear apart, as a rotten rag.
kgamolotsê - (same as "kgakgamolotse"), has pulled or torn asunder, as a rotten rag.
kgampanê - (same as "bora"), bow.
kgampetla - (same as "kgapetla"), a slab; a large piece of broken ice; a large piece of wood; a seed pod of a tree; a piece of anything, like board, cardboard or pottery.
kgampo - (same as "kampo"), perhaps. kgampu abjJ.s., deep, as a vessel or a sore from which pus has escaped.
kgana - boast; exult; rejoice by dancing before an important personage; cry, as a jackal; stand solidly or still.
kganaritha - take a firm stand.
kganatha - (same as "kgamatha"), become smeared or bleared or smudged, as clothes by mud, or face and eyes by weeping.
kganathile - (same as "kgamathile"), has become smeared or smudged, etc.
kganêla - (same as "kganna prevent"),; disallow; forbid; prohibit; restrain; bridle; boast about; exult over.
kganêlêga - preventable; prohibitable.
kganêlêla - êla, prevent for; disallow for, etc.
kganeletse - has prevented for, etc.
kganeletswe - has been prevented for, or at.
kganêl6 - 9N-, strife; a restraint; a stop in punctuation.
kganêlwa - being prevented etc.
kganetsany6 - discussion; argument; disagreement.
kganetse - has stopped or debarred.
kganetso - contradiction; refutation.
kganetswe - has been stopped or debarred.
kgang - newspaper article; topic of discussion; kgang ya moruthuta, serious and earnest debate; strife; a quarrel; a discussion; a debate; a disputed question; an argument; a contention.
kgangkgolo - leader in a newspaper; leading article; talking point.
kgangwa - (same as "kgamiwa being chocked"),; being throttled.
kgankgaswane - (same as "kgaswane"), old othing still in use.
kgannyê Loc - at a debate discussion, etc.
kgano - (same as "kganwe"), a mongoose; meercat. -.
kgantejê - ADV. OFT., same as kgantelê, more frequently used; by and by; in a little while.
kgantelê - ADV. OF T.,same as kgantejê, more widely used, by and by; in a little while.
kgantla - pound; stamp; crush by pounding.
kgantlaka - pound repeatedly; crush or bruise with repeated strokes.
kgantlakgantla - pound repeatedly; crush or bruise with repeated strokes.
kgantlana - pound or bruise each other.
kgantlapane - 1A¢-,same as kgantlape, male rock lizard.
kgantlape - (same as "kgatlampane or kgantlapane"), a fat, rough lizard, blue under the chin; a species of lizard.
kgantlêga - crushable or poundable.
kgantlegile - pounded; has become pounded.
kgantlêla - pound or stamp for.
kgantlêlwa - being pounded for.
kgantlile - has pounded, or has crushed.
kgantlisa - cause or help to crush.
kgantlisitse - has caused or helped to crush.
kgantlisiwa - being caused or helped to crush.
kgantliwa - or pounded.
kgantsadi - 1A9- AND 9N-, and dikgantsadi, sibling of the opposite sex; a sister; a brother, same as kgaitsadi.
kgantsadia - AND 9N-, and dikgantsadia, same as kgaitsadia, a sister to or a brother to.
kgantsadiakê - 1A9- AND 9N-, kgantsadiakê and dikgantsadiakê, same as kgaitsadiakê, my brother; my sister.
kgantsadiê - 1A9- AND 9N-, and dikgantsadiê, his/her brother; his/her sister, same as kgaitsadiê.
kgantsadiê - AND 9N-, and dikgantsadid, same. as kgaitsadiê, your brother; your sister.
kgantsha - have confidence in; confide in; trust, or rely upon.
kgantshitse - has confidence in a person; has trusted in, etc.; has boasted of.
kgantsh6 - confidence; trust; reliance.
kganwê - (same as "kgano a species of weasel"), red in colour; mongoose.
kgaodisa - restrain; hush a fractious child; stop a crying child; cause or help to make cattle take turns, as when drinking.
kgaodisana - help one another to make cattle take turns, as when drinking.
kgaodisitse - has restrained; has caused cattle to take turns, as when drinking.
kgaodisitswe - has been caused or helped to restrain; has been caused or helped to make goats, cattle, etc., take turns when drinking, or going into a crush.
kgaodisiwa - being restrained etc.; being caused to take turns, as when drinking.
kgaoditse - has kept quiet, i.e. has stopped scolding, or crying; has stopped raining.
kgaodiwa - being made to stop crying, etc.; being comforted.
kgaoga - become broken; be cut; snap as a cord; be divided. 1p. Expr, go kgaoga pelo, be dismayed or upset.
kgaogaka - become broken much.
kgaogana - break a bond; cease being friends; separate by mutual agreement.
kgaoganngwa - being reconciled; being separated, as members of a group.
kgaogan6 - 9N-, strife; a division; a separation.:.
kgaogantsê - has reconciled disputing parties, etc.; has shared a thing among.
kgaogantswê - have been reconciled; has been shared out.
kgaoganya - share out; be an instrument of peace; separate (actively); divide; cause separation.
kgaoganye - have broken away from each other, etc.
kgaoganyeditse - has separated for; has reconciled for.
kgaoganyeditswe - has been separated for.
kgaoganyediwa - (same as "kgaoganyetswa"), being separated for.
kgaoganyetsa - separate for; reconcile.
kgaoganyetswa - (same as "kgaoganyediwa"), being separated for.
kgaogêla - be cut for; become broken for.
kgaogêlwa - being broken for.
kgaogile - cut, or broken; has become cut, or broken.
kgaola - cut; separate; divide; excommunicate; make a division.
kgaolaka - cut much, or into many; divide.
kgaolana - cut each other; to excommunicate each other, etc.
kgaolêla - separate, divide, or excommunicate for; cut one short, in speech.
kgaolêlwa - being cut separated, divided, or excommunicated for.
kgaoletse - has cut, separated or divided for.
kgaoletswe - has been separated, divided or excommunicated for.
kgaol6 - chapter; section; district; an area.
kgaolwa - or separated from.
kgaosedisa - prevent from continuing with.
kgaosedisitse - has prevented from continuing with.
kgaosedisiwa - being prevented from continuing with.
kgaosediwa - (same as "kgaosetswa"), being interrupted.
kgaosetsa - end abruptly; cause thread of a screw to break.
kgaotsa - stop crying; stop or reduce the rate of doing, as wind blowing, or rain falling.
kgaotsê - has cut.
kgaotswê - has been cut.
kgapa - hole in tooth; dental caries; cavity.
kgapa - and magapa, the bone around the eye; the empty eye socket; the eye socket, hence a socket; a shell, as that of a tortoise.
kgapeditse - has done a thing often; has done a thing again and again; has repeated an act.
kgapetla - (same as "kgampetla"), a large piece of broken ice; a large piece of chopped wood; a seed pod of a tree; a piece of anything, like a board, cardboard or pottery.
kgapetlana - a small piece of ice; a small piece of chopped wood.
kgapetsa - do a thing often; do a thing again and again; do a thing repeatedly.
kgapha - restrain from doing; smooth out wet clay with the hand; smear a floor with wet dung.
kgaphafaditse - has made something an abomination.
kgaphafala - become an abomination.
kgaphafatsa - make something to become an abomination.
kgaphafetse - has made a thing an abomination.
kgaphaka - do much smearing with cow dung.
kgaphana - etc.
kgaphasêla - as waves; splash, as water after being dashed against a rock; shake, as a tripling horse; shiver from cold.
kgaphasêl6 - a vibration; a trembling; a splashing of water.
kgaphasetse - has splashed or dashed, as waves, etc.
kgaphea - splash and spill, as water while being carried; walk or wander aimlessly.
kgaphêga - as waves dashing against a rock; become well smeared, as a floor with wet dung, etc.
kgaphêgêla - êga, be forced back, etc., for.
kgaphegile - has been forced back, as waves dashing against a rock; has become well smeared, as a floor with wet dung, etc.
kgapheile - has splashed and spilled.
kgapheisa - cause to shake about and spill, as water while being carried.
kgapheisitse - has caused to shake, splash and spill, as water while being carried.:.
kgapheisiwa - being caused to shake about and spill, as water while being carried. kgapheiwa _v.s. pass, being splashed and spilt, as water while being carried.
kgaphêla - etc.; smear a floor with wet dung for.
kgaphetse - has forced back for; has smeared a floor with wet dung for.
kgaphile - has forced back; has smeared wet dung on the floor.
kgaphisa - help or cause to force back; has helped to smear wet dung on the floor.
kgaphisitse - has helped or caused to force back; has helped or caused to smear a floor with wet dung, etc.
kgaphisitswe - has been helped or caused to smear a floor with wet dung, ete.
kgaphisiwa - being helped or caused to smear a floor with wet dung, etc.; being forced back.
kgap6 - spoils; loot; things seized.
kgapu - a bittern; a hollow, as after the evacuation of pus.
kgaraditse - has caused to doubt; has mislead, as a path, or a misunderstood speech.
kgaraga - a solid compact or thickset thing; an engine or machine of any kind. The foreign words enjene and matshinê are commonly used.
kgarakgatsha - make to wander about; drive a living thing to and fro.
kgarakgatshana - make one another to wander about.
kgarakgatshêga - be made to wander about; be made restless (physically or mentally).
kgarakgatshegile - has wandered about.
kgarakgatshitse - has made to wander about, etc.
kgarakgatshitswe - has been made to wander about.
kgarakgatshiwa - being driven to and fro.
kgarameditse - has driven forced, or pushed away, etc.
kgarameleditse - has driven for; has pushed away for.
kgarameletsa - drive for; force or push away for; push a thing along the ground for, or to; push on to.
kgarametsa - drive; force; push away; push a thing along the ground.
kgarametsêga - be driveable, or forceable, etc.; be driven, or forced, etc. successfully; be pushed.
kgarametsegêla - êga, be driven or forced on to; become pushed on to.
kgarametsegile - driven or forced, or pushed successfully.
kgaratla - similar to kurutla, which is more commonly used, growl.
kgaratlêla - or over.
kgaratletse - has growled at.
kgaratlha - struggle; struggle to loosen oneself from shackles or impediments; struggle to break loose; turn from side to side, as a sick person; run hither and thither, as cattle shut up in a kraal.
kgaratlhaka - struggle.
kgaratlhêga - struggle, with some success, to break loose from an impediment.
kgaratlhêla - struggle for, or to.
kgaratlhetse - has struggle for, or to.
kgaratlhisitse - has caused to struggle.
kgaratlhisiwa - being caused to struggle.
kgaratlhiwa - being struggled.
kgaratsa - cause to doubt; mislead, as a path, or a misunderstood speech [arcu].
kgaratsêga - be in doubt, etc. [archaic].
kgaratsegile - has become doubtful, etc. [arcu].
kgare - a ring made of oth used to cushion things carried on the head; a crown of porcupine quills.
kgarebana - an unmarried woman.
kgarebane - (same as "kgarebana"), an unmarried woman.
kgarebê - young woman; virgin.
kgarêl6 - a pad; a washer.
kgariditse - (same as "kgwarintsê"), has scratched with the nails or with some other sharp-ended object.
kgaritlha - scrape round and round a pot or some other container from which food or beer has been taken; use up the remaining bits of a thing; finish food, water, etc.
kgaritlhaka - drain or scrape to the last drop or morsel. kgaritlhana y.s. rec, dispossess each other of the last items or possessions.
kgaritlhêga - become drained, emptied or finished.
kgaritlhegile - has become drained, emptied or finished. -.
kgaritlhêla - empty or finish for.
kgaritlhetse - has drained emptied or finished for.
kgaritlhile - has drained, emptied or finished.
kgaritlhisiwa - being caused or helped to empty, etc.
kgaritlhiwa - being emptied, drained or finished.
kgaritsa - (same as "kgwaritsa"), scratch with nails or some hard object.
kgar6 - a coik; a tress of hair.
kgarubane - 9N-, as kudubane, a turtle.
kgarub6 - or festering sore.
kgasa - (same as "polwane a brick that is not dry"),; a lump of ay used for building; crawl; mortar; plaster or join with mortar.
kgasa - crawl.
kgasetsa - crawl for or to; mortar for or to.
kgasudile - (same as "kgasutsê"), has poured contempt on.
kgasula - pour contempt on something.
kgasutsê - (same as "kgasudile has poured contempt on").
kgaswane - an old piece of othing or blanket that is still in use.
kgaswe - (same as "kgaswane").
kgatakôê - siING. oF dikgatakê, a trampling on; a treating of another contemptuously.
kgatampi - (same as "thutubudu"), a hole or hollow from which soil has been taken; a rubbish dump; an ash-pit.
kgatêlêl6 - n., dikgatêlêlê, emphasis; stress or pressure.
kgatha - break up new soil; gulp, as when swallowing mouthfuls of a liquid.
kgathaditse - has caused an individual some discomfort; has bothered unnecessarily.
kgathaditswe - has been made weary or tired; has been made uncomfortable, etc.
kgathadiwa - (same as "kgathatswa"), being bothered.
kgathala - (same as "Japa"), tire or weary; become tired or weary; show concern about; getting out of breath.
kgathalêla - have a high regard for; care for.
kgathalêlana - be concerned about each other's wellbeing.
kgathatsa - weary or tire out.
kgathetse - in a state of being weary; has felt tired; has shown concern about.
kgathile - has ploughed new ground, etc.
kgathilwe - has been ploughed, as new ground.
kgatholêla - probably DER F.1D. EXPR kgotho, swallow liquid greedily; gulp down.
kgathologa - become refreshed; ignore; take no heed.
kgathologile - has taken no heed.
kgatholola - cause to ignore.
kgatholotsê - has refreshed; has made to take no heed.
kgathwa - being ploughed, as new ground.
kgatikantse - has brandished or waved from side to side, as a sword, etc.
kgatikanya - brandish or wave from side to side, as a sword; slash, or cut sideways with a sword, battle-axe, or stick.
kgatimokantsê - has brandished or waved, etc., as in mock-battle.
kgatimokanya - in mock-battle.
kgatisets6 - 9N., a press; a printing press.
kgatis6 - (same as "dene"), an iron.
kgatlakgatla - ê difokotswana, modikologa o jelê pholo ya tona.
kgatlampane - ¢., a species of agama or lizard. -.
kgatlana - a small edible bulb. kgatlha 1. expr, of meeting each other.
kgatlha - delight; interest.
kgatlhana - meet each other, hence 1p. exer, kgatlha-thuu.
kgatlhaneditse - has met at.
kgatlhanêla - meet each other for or over; join hands to act.
kgatlhanetsa - meet at.
kgatlhan6 - a meeting; a meeting place; the commonly used word for junction is dikgatlhd.
kgatlhanong DER - against; opposed to.
kgatlhantsê - has caused to meet; has drawn together.
kgatlhantsha - kgatlhana, meet with; welcome someone arriving; meet a problem head on.
kgatlhantshaka - meet with many; do plenty of welcoming.
kgatlhantshana - approach to meet each other; come forward to welcome each other.
kgatlhantshêga - be met; capable of being met.
kgatlhantshetsa - meet with for, or at.
kgatlhantshitse - has welcomed.
kgatlhantshiwa - being met with.
kgatlhanya - cause to meet; draw together; unite.
kgatlhanye - have pleased each other; have met each other.
kgatlhêga - become pleased; become amused; show an interest.
kgatlhêgêla - êga, become pleased with; become amused by; show an interest in; have a desire for something.
kgatlhêgêlana - < kgatlhêgêla.
kgatlhegetse - has become amused by, etc.
kgatlhêgê6 - a pleasure; a delight; lust.
kgatlhile - has pleased, delighted or interested.
kgatlhisa - make to delight in, etc.
kgatlhisitse - has helped to please; has made to delight in, etc.
kgatlhisiwa - (same as "kgatlhiswa"), being helped to please; being made to delight in.
kgatlhiwa - (same as "kgatlhwa"), being pleased; being delighted; being interested.
kgatlhoga - die suddenly; be killed suddenly.
kgatlhogile - was killed suddenly.
kgatlhola - as by a deadly stab or by poison.
kgatlhotsê - has killed a thing suddenly.
kgatlhwa - (same as "kgatlhiwa"), being pleased; being delighted; being interested.
kgatlhwa - admire.
kgatê - foot; sole of foot; a footprint of man or animal; a step; a footstep, hence the part of an ox's hoof that presses on the ground.
kgatsane - young woman in the divining bones.
kgatsane - (same as "sola"), a piece of hide, or sole leather.
kgatsêlê - first milk after calving; beestings; colostrum.
kgatšha - or spray.
kgatšhaka - spray, or sprinkle a lot or many times.
kgatšhana - spray, or sprinkle each other with.
kgatshane - ¢-, one of the small bones or dice used as bola, the wife of sejarwe, one of the large bones.
kgatshimol6 - spaciousness; largeness.
kgatšhisa - cause or help to sprinkle, or spray.
kgatšhisitse - has caused or helped to sprinkle, or spray.
kgatšhisiwa - (same as "kgatshiswa"), being caused to sprinkle, or spray.
kgatšhiwa - or sprayed.
kgatsimola - blow upon, as wind upon a heated body; cool; sprinkle water on.
kgatsimotsê - has blown upon, etc.; has cooled; has sprinkled water on.
kgatwane - (same as "kgatwê"), a species of agama or lizard.
kgatwê - a species of agama or lizard, probably the gecko.
kgaupeditse - (same as "gaufeditse"), has interposed orally; has made an interruption; has interrupted.
kgaupetsa - (same as "gaufetsa"), interpose orally; make an interruption; interrupt.
kgautlhantsê - has rent, or torn apart.
kgautlhantswê - has been rent, or torn apart.
kgautlhanya - rent, or tear apart.
kgautlhêga - become rent, as a skin bottle; be torn, or rent apart.
kgautlhêgile - has become rent; has become torn, or rent apart.
kgawa - be damp; become damp.
kgawêla - pursue on foot, or on horseback.
kgawetse - has pursued on foot, or on horseback.
kgawile - damp; has become damp.
kgaya - (same as "kgaa and aba"), apportion.
kgêba - chop out the backbone of an animal; chop in a slanting direction; dig up grass with a spade.
kgebile - etc.
kgedi - a hole under a fire for baking in; an underground oven.
kgedile - has sought; rejected.
kgêgêrêpê - s., broad and sharp. See tab.. xxi.
kgêkgêle - a small lump of flesh on the side of the tongue, not generally eaten; tonsil. _.
kgêkgêrêga - to break dry ground into clods by ploughing.
kgekgerisa - till land with difficulty through a lack of moisture.
kgekgerisitse - has tilled land with difficulty through a lack of moisture.
kgekgerisiwa - being tilled with difficulty because of a lack of moisture.
kgêkgêtha - removing the leg, rib and shoulder; cut into asymmetric portions; damage by making unsightly cuts and gashes by means of a sharp instrument.
kgêkgêthaka - cut many carcases, etc. into asymmetrical portions; cut a carcase up like an inexperienced butcher.
kgêkgêthana - hurt one another by inflicting cuts and gashes with a sharp instrument.
kgêkgêthêga - become mutilated by cuts and gashes; be slashed with a sharp instrument.
kgêkgêthegile - has become mutilated by sustaining cuts and gashes.
kgêkgêthêla - inflict cuts, slashes and gashes for.
kgêkgêthile - has cut a carcase down by the backbone, removing the leg, rib and shoulder; has cut into asymmetric portions, ete.
kgêkgêtholola - take away a leg-covering.
kgêkgêtholotsê - has taken away a leg-covering.
kgela - seek; reject. 1. Expr, kgela bosula, reject evil.
kgeledisa - graze the skin; make a superficial wound.
kgeledisitse - has grazed the skin; has made a superficial wound.
kgeledisitswe - has been grazed, as the skin; has been superficially wounded.
kgelegetlwa - (same as "kgelegetla"), a bitter herb, the root of which is used in the bojale or female initiation ceremony, probably species of Talimum caffrum.
kgeleisitse - has searched.
kgeleka - scratch deeply so as to make deep scratches.
kgêlêkana - scratch each other deeply.
kgêlêkê - 9n., champion; genius; a person of outstanding ability in any field.
kgeleketla - N., dikgeleketla, probably same as kgelegetlwa, species of Talimum caffrum; a bitter herb, the root of which is used in the bojale or female initiation ceremony.
kgeleketla - (same as "keleketla"), overflow continuously, as in a waterfall; run out continually.
kgeleketlile - (same as "keleketlile"), has overflowed continuously, or flown on continually.
kgelela - _N. cL. 9n., sinc. or dikgeleswa, a lump or swelling in the armpit, groin, etc.; a gland; a lymph node. prov. molato wa kgeleswa o tsogile.
kgeloga - similar to kgenola, turn aside; backslide.
kgelogile - has turned aside; has backslided.
kgelogile - has darted out at, as a dog.
kgelola - (same as "kgelosa"), cause to turn aside; cause to backslide.
kgelosa - (same as "kgelola").
kgelosetsa - cause to turn aside for; cause to backslide for.
kgelositse - has caused to turn aside; has caused to backslide.
kgelositswe - has been caused to turn aside, or to backslide.
kgelosiwa - (same as "kgeloswa being caused to turn aside").
kgemetha - cut off.
kgemethile - has smitten; has cut off.
kgemethilwe - has been smitten; has been cut off; has been hacked to pieces.: kgemethiwa _v.s. pass, same as kgemethwa, being smitten; being cut off.
kgemethwa - (same as "kgemethiwa").
kgêngwê - 1Ao-, bokgêngwê, a wild watermelon. prov. kgêngwê o ane a lekwa.
kgenoga - be turned away, or aside.
kgenola - similar to kgeloga, turn away, or aside.
kgenotsê - has turned away, or aside. kgêra_v.s. simp. ache; be in pain. kgêra _v.s. simp. plough before rain falls; plough hard dry land; plough the surface only. kgêrêga_v.s. eur, be always talking or crying; be troubled with a ceaseless dry cough.
kgeregile - has become troubled with a ceaseless dry cough.
kgêrêg6 - a dry cough.
kgerisa - (same as "kgesa"), bully other(s); ill-treat; tease.
kgerisitse - has bullied, or teased.
kgerisiwa - being bullied, or teased.
kgeru - (same as "tšheru morula nuts").
kgêruga - cough much without expectoration.
kgerugile - has coughed much without expectoration; has a hard, dry cough.
kgesa - (same as "kgerisa"), treat in a mean manner; despise.
kgesaka - despise one another; be mean to each other.
kgesana - despise one another; be very mean to one another. kgesêga_v.s. NEUT., be susceptible to being teased; succumb to being despised.
kgesegile - has succumbed to being despised.
kgesetsa - ill-treat for; despise for.
kgesisa - cause, or help to ill-treat.
kgesisitse - has caused or helped to despise, or ill-treat.
kgesitse - has despised, or illtreated.
kgesiwa - or ill-treated.
kgêtha - pay tax, or tribute; select; choose.
kgêthaka - pay many taxes; be very selective or select much.
kgêthana - select one another.
kgêthêga - taxable; selectable.
kgêthêla - pay tax for, or to; select, or choose for.
kgêthêlwa - being paid tax or rental for; being selected for; being chosen for.
kgethile - has selected.
kgethisa - cause or help to pay tax or impose tax; cause or help to select.
kgethisitse - has caused to pay tax, etc.; has helped to select, etc.
kgethisitswe - has been caused to pay tax, etc.; has been helped to select, etc.
kgethisiwa - (same as "kgethiswa"), being taxed; being helped to pay tax; being helped to select.
kgethiswa - (same as "kgethisiwa").
kgetla - cockle; mussel or oyster shell.
kgetla - avoid by by-passing; detour.
kgetla - leaf, etc.; break or cut a twig from a stump, or sucker out of the ground; reap by breaking off the heads; mow grass.
kgetlaka - break or cut many twigs, etc.
kgetlana - 9N-, same as kgetlana, the collar bone; avicle; mannerism of walking with one shoulder lowered and the other raised.
kgetlanêla - mow, pluck or cut for each other.
kgêtlêga - become weak or flimsy, as clothing; become weak and inflamed, as weak eyes.
kgêtlêgile - has become weak or flimsy, as clothing, eyebrow, etc.
kgêtlêla - or mow for.
kgêtlêlwa - being plucked, or mowed for.
kgetlile - broken, or cut a twig, etc.
kgetlisa - cause or help to pluck, mow or break a twig, etc.
kgetlisitse - has caused or helped to pluck, mow, etc.
kgetlisitswe - has been caused, or helped to pluck, mow, ete.
kgetlisiwa - (same as "kgetliswa being caused or helped to pluck"), mow, ete.
kgetliswa - (same as "kgetlisiwa").
kgetliwa - being plucked, mowed or cut, etc.
kgetlwa - (same as "kgetliwa").
kgêtsana_ - a little bag, or sack; a pouch; pocket, as one that is inserted or attached to coat, trousers, etc.
kgetsanyana ya tee - tea bags.
kgetsemêla - stamp, or make a noise, like a cart going over rough, rocky or uneven road.
kgetsemetse - has stamped or made a noise, like a cart going over rough, rocky or uneven road.
kgetsi - sack; bag; a case or matter being investigated. prov., kgetsi ya tsiê e kgênwa ka go tshwaraganêlwa.
kgoba - a stout perennial herb, Commelinaceae (Annellena aeguinoctiale).
kgôba - mince meat in a mortar; pound into a paste.
kgêba - reproach or find fault in; agitate or stir up.
kgêbaka - upbraid, etc.; mince, etc. kgobakgetsi 1p. expr, take it easy; be at ease.
kgobakgoba - trot, as a horse; move about, in search of; call at a place repeatedly without receiving satisfaction.
kgobaladitse - has humbled or humiliated.
kgobalala - (same as "kgwabofala"), be humble; become tame; lie low.
kgobalalêlana - be humble towards.
kgobalalê - humility; humiliation; tameness; lowliness.
kgobalatsa - (same as "kgwabofatsa"), make tame; humiliate; bring low.
kgobaletse - similar to kgwabofetse, is humble; is tame.
kgobanêla - find fault in each other.
kgobantsê - has caused to find fault in each other.
kgobantsha - (same as "kgobanya"), cause to find fault in each other, etc. kgobanya see kgobantsha.
kgobati - inner bark of a tree, used as rope; NB, inner bark of mosu, or Acacia arabica and that of mophane; is commonly used when tying rafters together.
kgôbê - a single cooked bean, or a grain of maize that is cooked ina mixture. prov, go tlhaba kgêbê ka mutlwa.
kgobe - 9N-, SHORT FORM OF mogobe, a waterhole; a pool; a dam; a stern. kgobea _v.s. sIMP., DIAL. VAR. OF gobea, mill about excitedly and in all directions, as a milling crowd.
kgobedu - valve in the heart. 1p. ExPR, go jesetsa mo kgobedung, to plague a person.
kgôbêga - to languish or become weak; become minced or pounded.
kgobêgêla - êga, become minced for.
kgobegetse - has become minced or pounded for.
kgobêla - particularly tree branches; shut up securely, as a door of a house with bushes and stones.
kgôbêla - -and-down movement of a pump; pound or mince for.
kgobêlêla - heap or pile much.
kgobêlôê - 9N-, dikgobêlê, a hollow at the side of a cow's rump, indicating the approach of calving time.
kgobera - stir up; agitate; unsettle especially a liquid in which the dregs have gone to the bottom.
kgoberaka - stir up much; agitate many things.
kgoberana - poke one another; provoke one another.
kgoberêga - be agitated.
kgoberegile - has stirred or agitated.
kgoberêg6 - a Stirring; being stirred; a state of agitation.
kgoberisitse - has caused or helped to agitate.
kgoberiswa - (same as "kgoberisiwa"), being helped to stir, or agitate. kgoberiwa _v.s. pass, same as kgoberwa, being stirred, or agitated.
kgober6 - n., kgobera, a stirring up.
kgoberwa - (same as "kgoberiwa"), being stirred, or agitated.
kgobetse - has shut up securely as a door of a house, with bushes and stones; has heaped, or piled, particularly tree branches.
kgobetswe - has been shut up securely, as a door of a house with bushes and stones.
kgobile - has upbraided; has reproached; has raked; has minced meat; has agitated, etc.
kgobilwe - has been reproached; has been upbraided, etc.
kgobisa - cause or help to mince or pound.
kgobisitse - has caused to upbraid, etc.; has helped to mince meat.
kgobisiwa - being caused to upbraid, etc.; being caused to mince, etc.
kgobiwa - being upbraided, etc.; being minced or pounded.
kgôb6 - - same as sekgdbd, which is more commonly used; a reproach; an upbraiding.
kgobodisa - cause skin damage by rubbing against some object; make a smooth surface rough through rubbing; make burp; cause to belch.
kgobodisitse - has caused the skin to be damaged through rubbing; has made coarse a surface that was smooth by rubbing; has caused to belch.
kgobodisiwa - being damaged, as the skin; being made coarse; being caused to belch.
kgoboga - become frayed; to tub off; fall off, as a scab.
kgoboga - to rub or wear off; peel; have abrasion.
kgobogêla - become frayed for, etc. 1gobogetse v.s.prr. < kgobogêla, has become frayed for, etc.
kgobogile - has become frayed.
kgoboka - bring together; gather.
kgobokana - assemble; gather together; crowd together.
kgobokane - have assembled; are gathered together.
kgobokanêla - assemble for or to; gather together for; press upon.
kgobokanetse - has assembled for, at or to, etc.
kgobokantsê - has made to gather; has collected together.
kgobokanya - cause to assemble; make to gather; cause to come together as a group; collect together.
kgobokany6 - %-, dikgobokanyê collection.
kgobola - fray; make the skin peel by rubbing it against some object; remove top layer of a surface; smooth a surface that is coarse, and vice versa; rub off, as paint; burp; belch.
kgobololôê - a reproaching or reviling.
kgôbêtla - gather together money, etc.; crowd; throw stones at; hit with big cane; shoot volleys of bullets at; rain on heavily, etc.; hurt the feelings by speech; speak disparagingly to; despise as being of no use.
kgêbêtlaka - rain heavily on, etc.
kgêbêtlana - throw stones at one another; hit each other with big canes, etc.
kgobêtlantsê - has gathered together, as stones; has gathered a crowd together.
kgêbdtlanya - gather together, as stones; gather a crowd together.
kgobêtlanye - have gathered together, as stones, etc.
kgobotleditse - has attacked violently with stones at close quarters; has stoned with many stones.
kgêbêtletsa - stone; attack violently with stones at close quarters.
kgobotlile - has despised as being of no use; has spoken disparagingly to; has hurt feelings.
kgodile - has plucked.
kgodisa - (same as "thani or thabe"), hiccup; hiccough.
kgodisa - help to pluck or harvest fruit melons, etc.
kgodisitse - has helped to pluck.
kgodisiwa - being helped to pluck fruit, etc.
kgodis6 - enlargement; exaltation; upbringing.
kgodu_ - liquid from boiled pumpkin or melon; the juice of sweet melon; a liquid thick with sediments.
kgodugotshwane - the hollow at the back of the neck, or under the knee or the elbow; popliteal fossa.
kgodukêma - (same as "kodukêma"), adam's apple.
kgodum6 - a rebound.
kgodumodumê - n., sING., a legendary monster.
kgoeletso - proclamation.
kgofa - (same as "kgorola"), a tick; the unbeaten-out corn removed in winnowing.
kgofê - a nap.
kgôga - commonly called taselebomo, the pole linking the wagon or cart with the span of animals.
kgogaga - start or rush at suddenly; snap at, as a dog.
kgêgakgôgan6 - a misunderstanding; dispute.
kgêgamasigo - one of the morning stars, that fades out of sight at sunrise.
kgoge - similar to sekgoge, a asp; a hook, as of a stick, etc., for drawing things towards one.
kgogedi - similar to kgogêla, a large water snake; a monster; a dragon.
kgogedimotlakase - electromagnet.
kgogeditse - has hooked, has caused to hang from a hook.
kgogediwa - being hooked; being hung by a hook; being dangled from a hook.
kgogêla - (same as "kgogedi"), more commonly used than kgogedi, a mythical snake which draws victims into water by the victims' shade.
kgogetsa - (action); clasp.
kgogetsa-nama - a flesh hook.
kgogetsana - hook each other.
kgogetsantsê - has hooked together.
kgogetsanya - hook together.
kgogetsanye - have hooked each other; have interlocked.
kgogo - edible root of the motswaitswai or nkwai plant; the old name for a fowl of either sex [archaic].
kgogobe - pharynx.
kgogodi - ING. oF dikgogodi, rubbish floating on, or left by receding water; an infectious disease among cattle; a pestilence among people.
kgogogêla - snap at.
kgogogetse - has started out suddenly at.
kgogogile - has started, or rushed suddenly.
kgêgdja - adam's _apple.
kgogolamoko - 1Ao- AND 9N-, or bokgogolamoko, gather and carry along, and mmoko, chaff; winter rain; rain after harvest; the rain which ears away the chaff left on the threshing floor.
kgêgômêl6 - 9N-, a projection; a bay or gulf; a strait; a narrow piece of water between two countries; a channel.
kgogomog6 - a swelling; a hunch.
kgogonoka - a moorhen or water fowl; a coot.
kgêgôrôp6 - the hornbill bird, commonly called kêrwê; a curving like that of a sickle or rim of a wheel.
kgogotshwane - hoar frost.
kgogouma - a gulf.
kgêjana - riem; thong.
kgêjwa - be minced or pounded, as meat.
kgojwa - (same as "kgobiwa"), be reviled; be upbraided.
kgokagalê - adultery.
kgokêlê - n., dikgokêlê, same as sekdpêlê or sepêlê, safety pins; also hinge which is commonly referred to as hintshese.
kgokgoa - gather a number of different things together at the same time.
kgokgogile - has gathered a number of different things, etc.
kgokgolêla - labour for.
kgokgomeditsê - has taken indecent liberties with a female.
kgokgomisa - drag something along the ground.
kgokgomisitse - has dragged something along the ground.
kgokgontsha - offend; give cause for strife; treat badly or harass; put into state of commotion.
kgokgontshaka - harass much; vex much etc.
kgokgontshana - harass each other; treat each other badly.
kgokgontshetsa - vex, offend etc., for.
kgokgontshisitse - has caused or helped to harass, etc.
kgokgontshisiwa - being caused or helped to harass, offend, vex, etc.
kgokgontshitse - has harassed much; has offended, vexed or given cause for strife.
kgokgontshiwa - being vexed.
kgokgopala - be sickly; be stunted; be dwarfed.
kgokgotha - as a marrow bone on the hand; shake or slap gently or repeatedly, as when removing dust from a blanket or mat; trail on the ground, as a long garment.
kgokgothêla - as a marrow bone on the hand, for; shake, as when removing dust from a blanket or mat for.
kgokgothile - has knocked, as a marrow bone on the hand, ete.
kgokgothisa - help to knock, shake or slap gently and repeatedly, as when removing dust from a blanket or mat, etc.; cause to trail along the ground, drag a person along the ground.
kgokgothisitse - has helped to knock, as a marrow bone on the hand; has caused to trail along the ground.
kgokgothisiwa - being caused or helped to knock, shake, etc.
kgokgothiwa - as a marrow bone on the hand, etc.
kgôdkgôth6 - 1. Expr. sound of a wheeled vehicle moving over a rough surface.
kgokgotsê - has retailed scandal pj.
kgêkgêtsh6 - n.,dikgdkgêtshd, a hidden spot as a corner of a house, inside or outside; windpipe; larynx.
kgokgwane - a plug; a special plug for a sour milk sack. 1p. ExPR, go ntaya kgokgwane, to leak, as from a milk sack through a badly fitting plug.
kgokgweeditse - has made to stumble along.
kgokgweeleditse - has driven to; has made to career along.
kgokgweeletsa - drag a thing along in aid of.
kgokgweetsa - compel to go, by dragging along or pushing from behind; compel to go and hence cause to stumble.
kgokgweetsaka - compel to go by exerting much physical pressure; trip up.
kgokgweetsana - trip each other up.
kgokgweetsêga - be caused to stumble along; be caused to stumble and nearly fall.
kgokgweetsegile - has stumbled along.
kgokile - has joined things; has collected a few live coals with which to go and start a fire.
kgokoloditse - has beaten down, as an army.
kgokologa - roll down a steep slope; tumble down; descend abruptly.
kgokologêla - roll or tumble down to; descend abruptly to.
kgokologetse - has rolled or tumbled down to; has descended abruptly to.
kgokologile - has rolled down a steep slope; has descended abruptly.
kgokolosa - (actively); make something tumble down.
kgokoloseditse - has rolled something off a height.
kgokolosetsa - roll something off a height.
kgokolotsa - beat down, as an army.
kgokong - blue wildebeest; a gnu.
kgokonyana - a species of small bird, destructive to corn; grain-eating bird of either the finch or quelea family.
kgola - harvest fruit or melons; pull off or knock off, as an axe out of a sheath; wrench or pluck fruit or gum from a tree.
kgolaganêl6 - 9N-, a conspiracy.
kgôlê - (same as "kgwêlê"), a riem; a thong; shoelace.
kgolêga - be wrenched; come off, as an axe's handle; lose milk teeth.
kgolêgêl6._ - 9n., dikgolêgêl6, a prison; an imprisonment for, or at.
kgolegile - become toothless.
kgolêg6 - a binding; an imprisonment.
kgolêla - as fruit from a branch; compel to, or for.
kgolo ya morêlê apjJ - pHR, rising full moon. kgolobu 1p. ExPR, same as tolobu, of plunging into deep water.
kgologadi - colossus.
kgologolo - s., old; ancient.
kgolokgotha - cause a thing to roll; roll a thing along.
kgolokgothisa - cause or make a thing to roll.
kgolokwe - a globe; a round thing; a ball.
kgolokwefatshe - 99-, sphere; globe.
kgololêg6 - (same as "kgololêsêgê"), which is more commonly used, liberty.
kgololêsêg6 - < dikgololêsêgê, liberty; freedom.
kgololê - deliverance; a setting free; a release.
kgolologa - become unbound unfastened or loose; be set free, as a tonguetied child when relieved.
kgololola - unfasten, as riem of a pack-ox's burden; resolve a puzzle, or riddle; unravel a mystery, or make straight a difficult matter.
kgoma - touch; also DIAL. VAR. OF goma meaning rub with much fat; smear with dung.
kgomara - similar to kgomarêla, cling to; stick on, as a tick on a host.
kgomaragana - adhere to one another; mix together so that the particles adhere to one another.
kgomaraganye - adhered to one another.
kgomarêla - adhere to, as dust, evil, etc.; hand on to; stick fast to; lay hold of and refuse to let go, used mainly of parasites.
kgomaretsa - glue.
kgomaretse - has adhered to, as dust, evil, etc.; has stuck fast to; laid hold of, and refused to go.
kgomarisa - attach to; make something stick to, etc.
kgomarisitse - has attached to; has stuck something to.
kgomarisitswe - has been attached to; has been made to stick to.
kgomarisiwa - being attached to; being made to stick to.
kgomariwa - being smeared onto; being stuck onto by blackjack.
kgomarologa - unstuck.
kgometha - doing anything imperfectly particularly handicrafts; bungle; work badly; esteem a thing as of little account.
kgomethile - has done a thing imperfectly; bungled, etc.
kgometh6 - 9N-, imperfection; of little account.
kgomma - a mark made on the arm by burning, purposely; a brand.
kgomo - a general name for a cow; an ox; a bull.
kgomo bolêkane - 9N-, canned corned beef.
kgomo-di-metsing - 90, a herb that grows in rocky places and is used as medicinal tea; bush tea.
kgomo e namagadi - a cow. prov. /ebitla la kgomo ke molomo.
kgomo e tonanyana - an ox or bull. kgomoga v:s.NEUT. < kgomola, break, or snap off, as the handle of a cup; disconnect, or dislodge, as a handle; unhinge; dart out, or set off at a great speed; act in a peremptory manner.
kgomogêla - break off, etc., for; flare up in anger; dart out upon.
kgomogetse - has broken off etc., for; flare up in anger at; pounce upon, as a lion.
kgomogile - has broken off, or snapped off, as the handle of a cup, etc.
kgomola - etc.; wrench a handle free; open forcibly.
kgomorola - unstick a thing; unpaste.
kgomorologa - become unstuck, as something on to another thing.
kgomorolotsêga - peel off.
kgomošadi - (same as "kgomo e namagadi (Sekgalagadi or Western Setswana)").
kgomotsê - has pulled or plucked a pumpkin, etc.; has opened forcibly.
kgomots6 - comfort; a comforting; condolence. kgôna _v.s. simp. accomplish, especially something difficult; manage to do something; induce, or overcome by persuasion; become too dirty.
kgênagala - become accomplished; be accomplishable; be manageable.
kgênagetse - has become accomplished; has dwelt on a particular point, a thing or matter.
kgonama - similar to inama, rustic way of saying bend-down; bend down in a manner that exposes one's private parts.
kgonamêlana - bent forward indecently to, or for.
kgonamêlwa - being bent forward indecently to, or for.
kgonametse - has bent N forward in a manner that is indecent to, or for.
kgonametswe - has been bent forward in a manner that is indecent to, or for.
kgonamisa - cause to bend forward in an indecent manner; tilt or tip over.
kgonamisitse - has caused to bend forward indecently; has tilted or tipped over.
kgonamisitswe - has been caused to bend forward indecently; has been tilted or tipped over.
kgonamisiwa - being caused to bend forward indecently; being tilted or tipped over.
kgonamiwa - (same as "kgonangwa"), being bent forward, so as to be indecently exposed.
kgonatha - do anything with vigour or determination.
kgonathêla - pursue.
kgonathetse - has pressed hard after.
kgôênêga - be accomplishable; become persuaded or induced.
kgongwa - (same as "kgomiwa being touched"),; being rubbed with a lot of fat; being smeared with a lot of dung.
kgêngwana - a young yearling Ox, or one with horns just budding.
kgonkgonyane - liquid; black gum; an insignificant amount of.
kgonnê - has accomplished; has managed; has induced; has become too dirty; has become very dirty. kgono INnTERJ., instant breaking; being broken off deep inside, as a thorn in the flesh.
kgôn6 - potential.
kgono - (same as "kgotsa"), or; perhaps; maybe.
kgonoga - become broken off, as a thorn, or some similar object.
kgonogêla - become broken off, as a thorn in the flesh.
kgonogêtse - has become broken off.
kgonog6 - PROBABLY a faint; emaciated; a dead sleep.
kgônôn6 - a grub that feeds mainly on mogôênênd, wood.
kgonoseditse - has broken off a thorn, leaving a part inside the flesh.
kgonoseditswe - has been broken, as a thorn, with a part remaining inside the flesh.
kgonosediwa - (same as "kgonosetswa"), being broken off and leaving a part, etc., inside.
kgonosetsa - break off a thorn or any soft thing, leaving a part inside the flesh. kgonotso see kgonotswe.
kgonotšwe - ¢, a thumb; a big toe.
kgênwa - (same as "kgoniwa being persuaded"),; being induced.
kgonya - stop suddenly or abruptly.
kgonyaitlhê - and itlhd, eye; a vulture, or carrion bird.
kgo6 - a loud cry; shouting.
kgopa - a snail; a stout perennial herb, Anellemaaegunoctiale.
kgopa - trip up; stumble against; offend; displease.
kgopaka - trip up often; stumble against often. '.
kgopakgopeditse - has trodden on one's heels; has tripped up; has interfered repeatedly with the performance of a task.
kgopakgopetsa - tread on one's heels; trip up.
kgopakgopetsana - 's heels; get into each other's way.
kgêpama - become bent; become crooked; become curved, twisted, or warped.
kgêpamaka - become very bent; become hopelessly twisted, or warped.
kgêpame - has become bent or crooked; has become curved, twisted, or warped.
kgêpamêla - become bent for, or to; become curved, or twisted for, to or at.
kgôpametse - has become bent for, etc.; is curved, or twisted towards.
kgêpamisa - warped or twisted.
kgêpamisitse - has caused to be bent, warped, or twisted.
kgêpamisitswe - has been caused to be bent, warped, or twisted.
kgêpamisiwa - being caused to be bent, etc.
kgopana - snail.
kgopana - a headdress; anything worn on the head as a decoration.
kgopana - trip each other; stumble against one another; offend, displease, or provoke one another.
kgopê - a species of grasshopper, or locust that is not edible; an unmarried person of either sex.
kgopêga - become offended; be caused to stumble.
kgopêla - offend for; cause to stumble for.
kgopha - gather all together, or entirely; tub a skin, or riem, between hands when braying it; bray skins by tramping on them; hook, or pull down the branch of a tree, etc.
kgophe - a species of a large snail.
kgophêga - be gathered together, etc., as all the goods of a house; become scooped, as water, or refuse, etc.
kgophê - a small bush with edible fruit.
kgophoga - be thrown over, or upset; improve social or economic position dramatically; slip out of the grip.
kgophogêla - throw over, or upset; improve social or economic position for.
kgophogile - has thrown over, or upset; has improved social or economic position.
kgophola - throw over, or upset; carry away, as a flood; wrench from; snatch away; pull suddenly towards; actively improve the social or economic position of.
kgopholêla - throw over, or upset for; carry away, as a flood for.
kgopholola - DIAL. VAR. OF kgopolola remove a mistaken impression; set right; rectify by administering corrective punishment, etc.; straighten, as a bent stick; treat an ailing epiglottis; straighten the epiglottis of a human, a dog, or fowl.
kgophololê - dikgopololê punishment.
kgopholotsê - has doctored the epiglottis of a human being, a dog or fowl.
kgophotsê - has thrown over or upset; has pulled suddenly towards; has carried away, as a flood.
kgopile - has tripped; has stumbled against; has offended, or displeased.
kgopilwe - has been tripped.
kgopisa - displease.
kgopisêgê - stumbling block.
kgopisetsa - offend someone for; displease for.
kgopisitse - has offended, or displeased; has caused to stumble.
kgopisitswe - has been offended, or displeased; has been caused to stumble.
kgopisiwa - being offended; being caused to stumble.
kgopis6 - a stumbling block; a cause of stumbling; an offence; an annoyance.
kgopiwa - being vexed; being displeased.
kgopo - pit for trapping animals.
kgop6 - a stumbling, an offence; a scooping, hence a eansing of water in a well.
kgopo - an edible onion-like root.
kgopodis6 - siING. or dikgopodisê commonly referred to as segopodisê, a remembrance; a reminder.
kgopoga - walk quickly; journey quickly; make a sudden, vigorous start, as when competing in a race.
kgopogile - has walked quickly; has journeyed quickly.
kgopola - drive away, as the wind.
kgopol6 - a thought; an idea.
kgopolola - DIAL. VAR. oF kgopholola remove a mistaken impression; set right; rectify by administrating corrective punishment, etc.; straighten, as a bent stick; to treat or straighten the epiglottis of a human, a dog or fowl.
kgopolotsê - has removed a mistaken impression, etc.
kgopotsê - driven away, as the wind.
kgopu_ - the root of a reed; the stalk of a pumpkin leaf.
kgora - abundance; plenty.
kgora - be filled; be satisfied with food; be "fed up"; be rich.
kgorêla - be filled; be satisfied with food for.
kgoreleditse - has prevented.
kgoreleditswe - was hindered; was prevented.
kgorelediwa - being hindered; being prevented.
kgoreletsa - hinder; prevent.
kgoreletsêga - become hindered, or prevented.
kgoreletsegile - has become hindered, or prevented.
kgorelets6 - a hindrance; an obstacle; hurdle.
kgori - a wild turkey; a bustard.
kgorikgotshwane - 99-, area behind knee; popliteal fossa. \.
kgorisa - satisfy; satiate; make pregnant (disrespectful usage).
kgorisitse - has satisfied; satisfied.
kgorisiwa - (same as "kgoriswa be satisfied"),; be filled.
kgôr6 - a gateway; a passage; an entrance; a ward (kgotla); similar to phatana, an entrance between two hills.
kgorôê - good harvests.
kgorobêlêla - press upon, or overcome in speech.
kgorobêlêlê6 - 9N-, dikgorobêlêlê necessity; urgency.
kgorobeletse - has pressed upon, or j pushed back; has pressed upon or overcome in speech. kgêrôg6_N.cL.9N-, SING. oF dikgêrdêgê, an arrival.
kgorogoba - a species of small scarlet bird found among reeds; an isolated swelling; crimson-breasted shrike.
kgorokgoditse - has tried to keep a person to his duty, etc.
kgorokgorwana - padlock; matchbox. kgorokgotsa_v.s.simp.,same as kgotlhokgotsa, try to keep a person to his duty or appointment; shake up and down, or from side to side.
kgorola - or tufts of corn still attached to the husk.
kgorola - (same as "kgofa"), tick.
kgorola - remove grain from cob; compel to work.
kgoromana - press upon each other, as people in a crowd or things through being badly arranged.
kgoromantsê - has overcrowded; has heaped up, thus overcrowding things.
kgoromanya - cause things to press upon, or knock against each other, by heaping them up, or overcrowding them.
kgoromanye - have pressed against each other, as people in a crowd, or objects badly arranged.
kgoromeditse - has cast out; has pushed.
kgoromeletsa - push out to.
kgorometsa - aS a woman In labour; push forward; thrust away; shove; reject; spurn; to push something heavy.
kgorometsana - push, or jostle each other; push each other in a go-cart.
kgorometsantsê - pushed or jostled each other; pushed each other ina go-cart or similar vehicle. kgorometsanya vV.S. REC, same as kgarametsana, push or jostle each other; push each other in a go-cart.
kgêrênyana - small opening or surface; small orifice; pore; a small gateway.
kgorosane - an insect that lives in a grass-woven case. It is said to be very injurious to the animal that eats it.
kgorotlha - roar; snore; rattle, or gurgle; grunt; have croup.
kgorotlhaka - snore much etc.
kgorotlhêla - snore for.
kgorotlhetse - has roared for; has snored for.
kgorotlhile - has roared; has snored.
kgorotlhisitse - snore, or rattle.
kgorotlhisiwa - being caused to roar, snore, or rattle. kgorotlhiwa _v.s. pass, being rattled.
kgorotlhê - snore; a grunt.
kgorwa - being satiated.
kgdrwana - a small gateway, or opening.
kgêsana - a petty chief; a prince.
kgoseditse - has shut a door by lifting, or hooking it; hooked out.
kgosetsa - shut a door by lifting, or hooking it.
kgosi - AND 9N-, and dikgosi, a chief; a king.
kgosi sebakeng comP - ID. EXPR, independent chief.
kgosigadi - ING. oF dikgosigadi, a queen; a chieftainness.
kgosikgolo - emperor; paramount chief.
kgosing - royal palace.
kgosoba - be feeble; walk freely; to walk in a trembling manner as a convalescent, or a weakling.
kgosobile - walked in a trembling manner.
kgosola - carry away or clean away rubbish and refuse, as a flood, or heavy rain.
kgosom6 - a shaking; a tottering.
kgoteletsa - live coal positioned so as to burn a particular individual.
kgôtêl6 - a burning; a rising temperature; fierceness.
kgotha - pull back forcibly; restrain; draw forcibly. 1p. ExPR, kgotha lerudi, shrug the shoulder.
kgothaditse - has strengthened; has exhorted to action.
kgothakgotha - made to be ill at ease; nag.
kgothala - become strong, or strengthened; work even harder than previously; become established, as a people.
kgothatsa - strengthen; establish; exhort to action.
kgothats6 - (same as "kgwathatsd"), encouragement.
kgothêga - become bare, as when vegetation is lost.
kgothêla - pull back, or jerk back for.
kgothetse - and kgothêla, has become strong, etc.; has pulled back, or jerked back for.
kgothi - 9N-, stem particularly that of a tree; stalk connecting a pumpkin with the vine.
kgothotsa - pickpocket.
kgotla - originally an assembly of tribal elders; now a community or tribal meeting held at the ruler's residence; the place or enclosure where the community assembles for any kind of business that is of importance to the community; the household (lineage) or family of a person.
kgotla - (action) of shaking up and down, or from side to side.
kgêtla - poke with the point of a finger; tease, or provoke by poking a finger at; make a dent, or dip with a finger into a jelly-like substance, as Vaseline.
kgotlaka - dip a finger into many times.
kgotlakgakolol6 - 9N-, advisory board.
kgotlana - poke a finger at each other.
kgotlaomonê - syrup.
kgotleditsê - has made someone's temper flare.
kgôtlêga - poke; provoke by poking with a finger.
kgêtlêla - defile; touch a thing when not supposed to; dip a finger, or stick into Vaseline, etc., for.
kgotleletsa - poke, or stir a fire for. tas.
kgotleletsana - stir a fire for each other.
kgotletsa - stir a fire; push the ends of burning sticks into a fire.
kgotletse - has dipped a finger in, or for; has defiled.
kgotlhagana - touch, or press upon each other in a crowd; become unsettled, or not at ease over something.
kgotlhagantsê - has caused to come close together; has crowded, i etc.
kgotlhaganya - cause to come close together; make to crowd together.
kgotlhaganye - have come close together; have crowded together, etc.
kgotlhaganyeditse - < kgotlhaganyetsa have pressed upon; has crowded objects together for; have surrounded an individual.
kgotlhaganyediwa - < kgotlhaganyeditse being pressed upon; objects being crowded together for.
kgotlhaganyetsa - press upon; crowd objects together for; have surrounded.
kgotlhakgotlha - do some trial-and-error moves; provoke subtly or stealthily.
kgotlhang - discord; disagreement; mischief; conflict.
kgôtlhê - copper; brass.
kgotlhokgoditse - has shaken up and down, or from side to side; has shaken out of complacency.
kgotlhokgodiwa - being shaken up and down, or from side to side.
kgotlhokgoleditse - has shaken up and down, etc., for.
kgotlhokgoletsa - shake up and down, or from side to side for.
kgotlhokgotsa - shake up and down, or from side to side.
kgotlhokgotsaka - shake up and down, or from side to side repeatedly.
kgotlhokgotsana - shake one another, as a trial of strength.
kgotlhokgotsêga - be shaken up and down, as a liquid in a container, or as an object that is stalling.
kgôtlhôlê - 9n., same as sehuba, cough.
kgotlhêl6 e tona - tuberculosis.
kgotloko - a bull.
kgotIwane - an upright pole, stick, or reed, in the wall of the house.
kgôt6 - (same as "kakana"), a wart.
kgdtobêlwe - -, a species of a large black vulture or carrion | bird.
kgotodua - a species of shrub with yellow flowers; Gnidia, Capitata.
kgotsa - either; or; whether; perhaps.
kgotshane - N.,area below back of the head; top of neck and back.
kgotshe - be satisfied; be satiated.
kgotšwa - (same as "kgopiwa"), } being vexed; being offended; being tripped up by something on the ground.
kgoudile - has gone in a drove or crowd as cattle or many people.
kgoula - go in a drove or crowd, as cattle or many people.
kgwa - expectorate; spit out. Used euphemistically to mean vomit. kgwa setšhwe v.PuR, pause, rest a while.
kgwabofaditse - has tamed; has caused to become tame.
kgwabofaditswe - has become tame, has been tamed.
kgwabofadiwa - being tamed, or quietened.
kgwabofala - become tame; become docile.
kgwabofatsa - tame; make tame.
kgwabofetse - is tame; has become tame.
kgwadi - mainly used in.
kgwadibane - S. 1A9- AND 9N-, or dikgwadibane, same as kudubane, kgadubane or khadubane, a turtle.
kgwadire - a species of eagle.
kgwalalê - dikgwalalêd stubbornness.
kgwale - red-billed francolin.
kgwana - s., denoting a cow of mixed colouring, particularly at the back but not on the belly.
kgwankgwanyeditse - < kgwankgwanyêtsa has neighed for.
kgwankgwanyêga - (same as "kgwankgwanyetsa"), neigh.
kgwankgwanyegile - < kgwankgwênyêga has neighed.
kgwankgwanyetsa - (same as "kgwankgwenyêga"), neigh.
kgwant6 - a pompous walk; an arrogant manner of walking.
kgwantsê - has knocked, or tapped. kgwanya _V.S.SIMP.,same as kokonya, tap; knock.
kgwanyaitIh6 - ¢., sina. or bokgwanyaitlhê the Egyptian vulture.
kgwanyakgwanya - or tap repeatedly.
kgwanyakgwanyeditse - has neighed for.
kgwanyakgwanyegile - has neighed.
kgwanyapê - 1A9- AND 9N-, and dikgwanyapê, a mythical dragon snake which comes with wind and rain and wherever it passes, it leaves an opening like that of a plough furrow, hence rainstorm or tornado.
kgwara - underline.
kgwara - EXPR, expressing state of complete dryness, as of the ground.
kgwara - Scrape or scratch with some hard and sharp instrument; strike a match.
kgwaraladitse - become stiff or hard, as a skin that has been wet.
kgwaralala - as a skin that has been wet; become hard, like a stone.
kgwaralatsa - make stiff rigid or hard, like a stone.
kgwarêga - scrape; scratch; light, as matches.
kgwarêla - scrape for; scratch for; light for; underline, or draw a line for.
kewaretse - has scraped for; has scratched for; has lit for; has underlined for.
kgwarile - has scraped; has underlined; has scratched, etc.
kgwarinngwa - being scratched.
kgwarintsê - has scratched.
kgwarintswê - has been scratched.
kgwaripa - s, roan; dirty red and white, the colours running into each other, used of a male animal.
kgwaripana - s.DIM. oF kgwaripa, said of colouring of a female animal, see kgwaripa.
kgwarisa - help to strike a match.
kgwarisitse - has caused to scratch, etc.
kgwarisiwa - being caused to scratch, etc.
kgwariwa - (same as "kgwarwa"), being scratched, etc.
kgwatha - be whipped while lying down.
kgwathaditse - has encouraged; has strengthened; has comforted. Same as kgothaditse, which is more commonly used.
kgwathafala - become weak; become submissive; become small in stature, as a dwarf; lie sick and silent.
kgwathafetse - has become weak; has become submissive; has become small in stature, as a dwarf.
kgwathaka - lie down to be beaten time and again. kgwathatsa _v.s.SIMP., DIAL VAR. OF kgothatsa, encourage; strengthen.
kgwathats6 - siING. oF dikgwathatsd, DIAL. var. oF kgothatsê, encouragement.
kgwathe - ¢-, bokgwathe, same as gopane, the former name is used in Northern Botswana, while the latter name is used elsewhere; mistaken for iguana, or Varanus exanthen aticus albugaris.
kgwathêla - lie down to be flogged for.
kgwathetse - has lain down to be flogged for; has lain down to be beaten for.
kgwathile - has lain down to be beaten; has lain down to be flogged.
kgwathisa - beat, or flog an individual who is lying down.
kgwathisitse - has flogged an individual who was lying down.
kgwathisiwa - being beaten while lying down; being made to lie down so as to be flogged.
kgwathis6 - dikgwathis6, a beating; a chastisement; a scourging. 3.
kgwathiwa - lying down to be beaten.
kgwathoga - as an eruption.
kgwathogile - has broken out, as an eruption.
kgwatialala - listen to reproof humbly and without answering.
kgwatialetse - has listened to reproof humbly and without answering.
kgwatlha - a wallet; a pocket, as one that is inserted or attached to a coat, trousers, etc.; a small bag.
kgwatlhafala - become submissive; become small in stature, as a dwarf, etc.; lie sick and silent.
kgwatlhametsêga - as a wild pig from a hole.
kgwatlhêla - put in a wallet, pocket ina small bag; hide in a kaross from.
kgwatse - a species of root; a carbuncle. kgwêba ap3s.s., denoting male animal that is spotted, or speckled; black or red, with mixture of white, or red and white about the lower part of a male animal.
kgwêbana - s, DIM. oF kgwêba, denoting female animal that is spotted, or speckled; black or red, with mixture of white, or red and white about the lower part of the body of a female animal.
kgwebeana - become confused; be in a confused state.
kgwebo-bodirê - 90-, industry.
kgwedi - 99, menstrual period; month; moon.
kgweedisa - help to drive animals or a vehicle.
kgweedisitswe - has been helped to drive animals, a vehicle, etc.:.
kgweedisiwa - being helped to drive.
kgweediwa - being driven.
kgweeleditse - has driven for, or to.
kgweeletsa - drive for, or to.
kgweetsa - drive, a vehicle or animals.
kgweetsaka - drive extensively; drive a lot.
kgweetsakgweetsa - drive a little; drive on and off.
kgweetsana - drive together, in a vehicle belonging to one or to both; drive each other, in a vehicle.
kgweetsêga - capable of being driven; driveable.
kgweetsegile - has become driven.
kgwêga - or at.
kgwêla - spit at; spit to.
kgwêlaka - spit upon many times.
kgwelana - spit upon each other; spit at one another.
kgwêlê - n., dikgwêlê, same as kgdlê, a riem, or thong; shoelace.
kgwele - any round object; commonly used to refer to a football.
kgwelea - entangle; put things into a net for carrying; burden.
kgweleagana - become entangled, as a bunch of wool on a bush; become piled.
kgweleagantsê - has tangled, as a bunch of wool on a bush; has made to be tongue-tied.
kgweleaganya - cause to be entangled; confuse; entangle; pile up; put in a big heap.
kgweleantsê - has entangled together.
kgweleanya - (same as "kgweleaganya").
kgweleile - has entangled; has put things into a net for carrying.
kgwelogêla - set off to.
kgwelogêlana - start or rush at each other and break off short.
kgwelogetse - started or rushed at and broke off short.
kgwelotsha - êlwa _v.s. DER. stay too long in foreign employment, or away from home.
kgwêlwa - being spat at, or on.
kgwenetšhe - (same as "kgwenepe"), short; stalk; thickset, hence a thumb or big toe, commonly called kgonotswe.
kgwerane - a god or symbol for God, in the bogwêra jwa tshetsd, or second degree of initiation or great pole.
kgwereane - be unable to see cause of action clearly.
kgwerean6 - 9N-,a confusion.
kgwereantsê - has made someone unable to see a course of action.
kgwereanya - confuse.
kgwereanye - is confused.
kgwereme - (same as "thukhwi"), aardwolf. prov., thukhwi o rile ke lobelê, marota a re ke namile.
kgwêtlha - as feeble knees; be shaky, as a door that is not properly fastened, or as a broken bone, part of which is dangling and not in place.
kgwêtlhaka - be shaky, as an object whose parts are loose, or as bones of a skeleton that are dangling.
kgwêtlhêla - as feeble knees, etc.
kgwetlhisa - shake, as wheels that are not fitting well.
kgwetlhisitse - has caused to shake, as ill-fitting wheels.
kgwetlhisiwa - be caused to shake, etc.
kgwetlhiwa - as wheels that are not tight; being loose, as wheels that need tightening.
kgwetlh6 - challenge.
kgwile - has expectorated; has spat out.
kgwisa - wean.a child, calf, etc.; terminate breast-feeding; cause to vomit; induce vomiting.
kgwisitse - has weaned; has made to vomit.
kgwisiwa - being weaned; being made to vomit.
kgwiwa - being vomited; be spat out. Khaba n.cL.14¢, the Modder River.
khabetšhe - 9N-, dikhabetshe cabbage [borrowed].
khabohaeterete - carbohydrate.
khabête - (same as "kôbôtê"), cupboard.
khabuêla - fall suddenly, as into an unseen hole.
khadi - (same as "kgadi"), an alcoholic drink that is prohibited by law. Traditional ingredients are segwere, moretlwa, or mogwana, and water.
khadiaka - wander aimlessly; move about like a drunk; behave like one that does not know what to do.
khaea - carve, or cut up.
khaêga - be carved.
khaêganye - has been torn in pieces.
khaêgile - was torn up as a flimsy thing; is torn up as a flimsy thing.
khaêla - carved, or cut up for.
khaete - kite [borrowed].
khaêtse - has carved, or cut up for.
khai - oth.
khakhabuêga - become rash.
khakhabuegile - became rash.
khakhabuêgê6 - 9n-, rashness.
khakhabuêla - be rash; act, or speak rashly.
khakhabuetse - has acted or spoken rashly.
khaladua - DIAL. VAR. oF kgaladua, blister beetle.
khalêntara - (FOR.] calendar.
khamologa - similar to kgakgamologa, be open, as a box, soles of a boot, etc.
khamologana - become separated, as two planks; be divided into two parties.
khamologan6 -: a division between friends; a breach.
khamologantsê - has caused divisions; has caused to be divided into two parties; has caused the division into two parties.
khamologanya - divide into two parties; cause divisions.
khamologanye - have become separated, as two planks; are divided into two parties.
khamologile - as a box, soles of a boot, etc.:.
khamolola - pull open, as a seam, etc.
khamolotsê - as a seam etc.
khamphane - dikhamphane company [borrowed].
khana - cry, as a jackal.
khanele - canal [borrowed].
khankhu - intense heat causing great perspiration.
khansêlê - council [borrowed].
khaontara - counter [borrowed].
kharabênê - caravan [borrowed].
kharête - carrot [borrowed].
khasêtê - cassette [borrowed].
khatebêkôse - 99-, dikhatebêkêse, cardboard box [borrowed].
khatelôk6 - catalogue [borrowed].
khaunngwa - being poured, a little of.
khauntsê - has poured a little.
khaunya - pour a little.
khaunyeditse - has poured a little for.
khaunyeditswe - a little has been poured for.
khaunyediwa - a little is being poured for.
khaunyetsa - pour a little for.
khaunyetsana - pour a little for one another.
khawa - mist.
khea - (same as "tlapea"), overcome; be too much for, as food a person cannot eat.
kheaka - similar to tlapeaka, overcome often or easily; be too much for.
kheana - overcome each other, as ina game of chess, etc.
khedile - has searched for in loose earth or ashes, etc.
kheêga - be overcome, as by sweetness etc.; be obstructed.
kheegile - be overcome; is overcome.
kheêla - overcome for; take a position of an impassable obstacle. khefi_N. cL. 9n-, sING. oF dikhefi [borrowed], cafe.
khekhele s - shallow, as a ford.
khêla - search for in loose earth or ashes; remove earth, etc., by a side movement of the hand; scratch on the surface, as a fowl.
kheleisa - etc., in seeking something; cause to search into.
kheleisitse - has turned over earth etc., in seeking something; has searched into.
kheleis6 - search; examination.
khelero - a die.
khemikhale - (For) chemical.
khemisi - 99-, pharmacy; chemist shop [borrowed].
khênêka - repair; fix an engine or something mechanical.
khênêkêga - become repaired.
khênêkêla - repair for.
khênêketse - has repaired for.
khenekile - has repaired.
khenekisa - cause or help to repair.
khenekiwa - being repaired.
kheologa - become a passable obstacle; be open to challenge, as in a game of chess, etc.
kheolola - reverse situation of being overcome.
khereise - 9N-, a game of throwing wild melons at each other played by women.
khiba - N.,same as tshiba, a pinafore; an apron; a skin worn in front by women; an apron made of skin.
khibidu - s, used with nouns of cLs.9 AND 10 red.
khibidu e e lethololo - pur, scarlet.
khibidu e e mokgona - PHR, crimson.
khidia - hinder from sleeping; haunt.
khidiaka - make very wakeful; haunt a lot.
khidiêga - be wakeful; be haunted by the thought or memory of some evil deed; be sleepless.
khidiêg6 - 9n., sina. or dikhidiêgê, anxiety; sleeplessness; worry.
khidiêla - make wakeful for; haunt for.
khidietse - has made wakeful for.
khidiile - haunted; has haunted.
khiêla - kill secretly; assassinate; murder.
khiêladitse - has stunned; has thrown down, as a person.
khiêlatsa - throw down, as a person.
khietse - (same as "lotleletse"), has locked in, or out.
khietse - has killed secretly; assassinated or murdered.
khiibôt6 - keyboard [borrowed].
khikhia - run slowly.
khilokerama - kilogram [borrowed].
khilometara - N., kilometre [borrowed].
khina - knee-halter a horse, donkey, etc.; tie a horse's leg.
khinnê - has fettered.
khintloga - become torn, or be torn off, as scraps of meat from a bone.
khintlola - tear scraps of meat from a bone with difficulty.
khirisê - hiring.
khirê - rent.
khitla - as a pig; dig superficially; kick about and be unable to rise, as a weak animal.
khitlile - has dug superficially, etc.
khobakhoba - (same as "kgobakgoba"), trot steadily.
khobakhobisa - cause to trot.
khobê - 9n-, shoe, edges turned down, commonly used in Sekgalagadi.
khobetsêga - become fallen in, or hollow.
khobetsegile - or hollow.
khodi - 9N-, same as kutla hen, or ostrich nest.
khofa - (same as "khoa khofa"), kgofa and kgorola, a tick.
khofe - 9N-,the korhaan; a nap; deep and brief sleep.
khokhoba - to jog.
khokhonate - 9N-, siING. oF dikhokhonate [FoR| coconut.
khokhune - (same as "khwena"), cocoon [borrowed].
kholifolawa - dikholifolawa (ror cauliflower.
khôêlôrê - collar of a garment [borrowed].
khonkabê - similar to dikwankwetla, commonly used in Koranna and Sekgalagadi, a kind of low shoe.
khonong - a pillar, or oud of dust, or smoke.
khênsata - a concert [borrowed].
khorase - chorus [borrowed].
khorêla - corolla [borrowed].
khoroum6 - chromium [borrowed].
khose - course [borrowed].
khotêtê - quartet [borrowed].
khotlokhotsa - (same as "kgotlhokgotsa which is commonly used"), shake repeatedly.
khoukhou - cocoa [borrowed].
khuagana - become puckered, or shrivelled, as a dry skin.
khuagantsê - has puckered up in sewing, etc.
khuaganya - cause to become puckered up, etc.; pucker up in sewing; pucker up the skin of forehead, as in anger.
khuakantsê - has overcome by talking, etc.
khuakanya - as by extensive trading; overcome by talking; overcast.
khuana - be, or become wrinkled.
khuanêgôê - < khuana, a disturbance.
khuanê - a wrinkle; a pucker.
khuantsê - has wrinkled, or puckered.
khuanya - wrinkle, or pucker.
khubama - kneel; be in labour, of a woman; crouch.
khubamaka - kneel many times.
khubame - knelt; is kneeling; be in labour of a woman; has given birth.
khubamêga - be capable of kneeling.
khubamêla - kneel for, or at or to.
khubametse - has knelt for or at.
khubamisa - cause to kneel; assist a woman who is in labour; take care of a woman who is in botsetsi, or confinement.
khubamisitse - has made to kneel.
khubamologa - rise from a kneeling position.
khubamologêla - rise from a kneeling position.
khubamologile - has risen up from kneeling; has ended a period of confinement.
khubamolola - make to rise up from a kneeling position.
khubamolotsê - has made to rise from kneeling.
khubidu - s., same as khibidu, red.
khubiki s - cubic.
khubitla - do a great job.
khubitlile - has worked very hard; has done great work.
khub6 - umbilical cord.
khubo - cube [borrowed].
khubu - (same as "mohubu"), a navel.
khubuloga - (same as "khubamologa"), rise up from a kneeling position.
khubulogile - rose, or has risen up from kneeling; see khubamologile.
khudu - tortoise. PRov. khudu ya mariga e itsiwe ke mmei.
khudubane - (same as "khadubane"), a turtle.
khuduêg6 - 9n-, siING. oF dikhuduêgd, an agitation; a bustle; a disturbance, such as a violent strike.
khuduêlê - (same as "khuduêla"), a kind of thick beer; mixture of meal and cold water to be put into boiling water to make thin porridge.
khuduga - a flitting; a changing of one's residence.
khudugê - a change of residence.
khuduthamaga - 9N-, tortoise, and thamaga, speckled; a committee such as an executive committee; a private matter; a secret meeting. NB, traditionally a tortoise was eaten by elderly men, i.e. wise men.
khudutlou - AND 9N-, or bokhudutlou, tortoise, and tlou, elephant; a species of very large tortoise. PRov., naga e e se nang khudutlou bolobete ba ipha naga.
khueleditse - similar to khueleditse, has thrown away.
khueletsa - throw away and out of sight.
khuetsa - throw a long way away.
khuhan6 - jealousy.
khuhufala - be bowed down; go down on hands and feet.
khuhuhetse - is, or was bowed down; or has gone down on hands and feet.
khuisa - deprive of food, purposely.
khuisitse - has deprived of food purposely.
khujane - ING. oF dikhujane, a sore swollen, or unhealed navel of an infant; a complaint of the bowels supposed to be caused by a sore navel; umbilicus; inflamed umbilicus.
khukhêla - chase game; pursue with perseverance; track or trail; remind one of a fault often, or continually.
khukhetse - has continued to run after, etc.; has tracked or trailed.
khukhu - any large beetle; a species of large black beetle with horny wings; a scavenger beetle.
khukhuna - similar to gogobêla, pick ripe fruit from among the unripe; pick sticks out of a hedge for a fire.
khukhunye - has picked ripe fruit from among the unripe; has picked sticks out of a hedge for a fire.
khukhutha - walk or run in short steps the body stooping and head bowed, to avoid being noticed.
khukhuthaka - walk or run much or frequently, in short steps, the body stooping and the head bowed, to avoid being noticed.
khukhuthêla - walk or run to or for so as to avoid being noticed.
khukhuthêlana - walk or run to one another or for one another, in short steps, the body stooping and the head bowed, to avoid being noticed.
khukhuthetse - has walked for or to, in short steps, the body stooping and the head bowed, to avoid being noticed.
khukhuthisa - cause to walk in a stooping position to avoid being seen.
khukhuthisiwa - being made to walk in a stooping position so as to avoid detection.
khukhuthiwa - being made to walk ina stooping fashion to avoid detection.
khukhwane - the generic term for a beetle; a small beetle; a small scavenger beetle.
khukhwisa - make a wry face, as if about to cry.
khukhwisitse - has made a wry face, as if about to cry.
khulara - N., dikhulara, a pelican. Khularê N.., dikhularê, turning of the back; death.
khumagadi - OLL. a woman of importance; a queen; queens or princesses.
khumanêg6 - n., dikhumanêgê poverty; absolute want.
khumarêla - adhere to; fasten on to.
khumaretse - (same as "kgomaretse"), has adhered to; has stuck to; has fastened. /.
khumêga - become shredded; be cut into short strips.
khumegile - has become shredded, etc.
khumêla - a tapeworm; the fibrous substance of an ox's horn.
khumis6 - a making rich; an enriching.
khumê - dikhumê and mahumê riches. prov.,khumê matlhare e a tlhotlhorêga.
khumoga - become uprooted; become pulled up; pull out of joint.
khumogile - has become uprooted; has been pulled up; has been pulled out of joint.
khumoKêla - as an abscess.
khumoketse - has become closed, as an abscess.
khumola - root out; pull out; pull out by the roots; pull out of joint; pull up by the arms.
khumoloditse - (same as "humuloditse"), has peeled, or stripped off bark, or torn skin from the flesh.
khumolotsa - to flay.
khumonta - (same as "humolotsa"), flay ina careless fashion; pluck off the fur of an animal.
khumontêga - be stripped of skin in a crude manner.
khumontegile - has stripped off skin crudely.
khumotsê - (same as "kumotsê has rooted out"),; has pulled out by the roots, ete.
khumpoga - or out.
khumpogile - has swollen up, as an abscess; has sprung up, or swollen out, as a mushroom.
khumpologa - (same as "kKhumpoga"), swell up, as an abscess; spring up, or swell out, as a mushroom.
khumpolola - remove meat covered by an ox hide; remove.
khumpolotsê - has removed meat covered by an ox hide; has removed.
khumutsê - (same as "khumotsê has uprooted").
khunagany6 - a tying together; a bond.
khunêl6 - a tying; an arrest; a bondage.
khungwa - a species of shrub with a red flower. khunou ap1.s., denotes an ox, bull or for that matter any other male animal that is reddish-brown in colour.
khuntha - blink, as a person with weak or sore eyes.
khunthile - has blinked, as a person with weak, or sore eyes.
khunwana - s., denotes a cow or any other female animal that is reddishbrown in colour.
khunwana - syphilis (early infectious stages).
khupa - ING. oF dikhupa, a man's wife's sister's husband.
khupa marama - cheeks, a secret; a private matter; a confidential matter.
khuparêlê - a grasp of the hand.
khupêlê - breathlessness; asthma; chest disease.
khup6 - a holding in the mouth; a sip; drunkenness; beer drinking.
khupu - pregnancy (occurring before menstruation is re-established).
khurany6 - a gnashing of teeth.
khuru - instantaneous and intense darkness; immediate and general wailing, as when death of kin has occurred.
khurukhuditse - has expelled, or banished, as a troublesome person.
khurukhutsa - similar to koba and /êlêka expel or banish, as a troublesome person.
khurumantsê - has put the food of two dishes together; put the food in one dish on top of that in another.
khurumanya - put the food of two dishes together; put the food in one dish on top of that in another.
khurumeditsê - has covered something up.
khurumêla - put a cover, or a lid ona vessel; cover; cork a bottle.
khurumêlaka - put covers, or lids on vessels, on and off, as if to hide the contents.
khurumêlêga - as a vessel on which you can put a lid; becoming covered.
khurumetsa - cover something up; overshadow.
khurumetse - has put a cover, or a lid on a vessel.
khurumola - (same as "khurumolola uncover"),; remove the lid or top of a thing.
khurumolotsê - (same as "khurumotsê"), has uncovered.
khurumotsê - (same as "khurumolotsê"), has uncovered.
khurutla - seek a lost thing with perseverance.
khurutlile - has sought a lost thing with perseverance.
khuti - N., same as lehuti, a hollow; a hole; the place below the horizon.
khutla - end; have menopause; die.
khutla - corner.
khutla - finish; cease; nudge with the elbow; knock against a thing with the foot.
khutlaka - finish a great deal of; cease often and for no reason; continuously nudge with the elbow.
khutlana - each other with the elbows; hurt each other, as bulls when fighting.
khutlantsê - has made to nudge each other with elbows, horns, etc.
khutlanya - knock one against another; cause to hurt each other.
khutlanye - have nudged each other; have hurt one another, etc. khutlêga_v.s. NEuT. sinc. oF dikhutlêga, suffer pains in lower abdomen of a man after intercourse with woman menstruating or after an abortion; be hurt; fall ill; become sick.
khutlêla_ - conclude at, or with; cease from; knock, or strike against.
khutletse - has concluded at or with, etc.
khutlhwantshwana - corner.
khutlile - finished; has finished; has ceased; has nudged with the elbow, etc.
khutlisa - make to nudge, hence to hurt.
khutlisitse - has brought to an end; has helped to nudge and hurt.
khutlisitswe - has been brought to an end; has been helped to nudge and hurt.
khutlisiwa - being brought to an end; being made to nudge and hurt; caused or helped to be struck with a fist.
khutlisôtir6 - 99-, siING. oF dikhutisdtirê ending of a contract; notice.
khutliwa - being nudged; being finished.
khutl6 - 9n., sina. or dikhutld, an angle.
khutl6 - an end; a finish.
khutl6 pri - swelling.
khutloga - be sulky; be dogged; refuse speak; be in a bad temper; become swollen.
khutlogêla - become sulky to; refuse to speak to; be swollen for.
khutlogêlana - become sulky to one another.
khutlogetse - sulk at or to; be not on speaking terms.
khutlogile - is in a bad temper; has become swollen.
khutlog6 - siING. oF dikhutlogê, sulk; swelling.
khutlola - (same as "khutlolola"), project; stick out; make more room.
khutlolola - project; stick out, etc.
khutlolotsê - similar to khutlotse, has projected, etc.
khutlosekoti - 9N-, obtuse angle.
khutlotsê - similar to khutlolotsê, has projected, etc.
khutlwa - being nudged; being finished.
khutsa - command one to desist, or cease from doing something.
khutsa - cry aloud; wail; cry, as an ostrich.
khutsafaditse - has made short; has shortened.
khutsafala - (same as "khutshwafala become short").
khutsafalêl6 - dikhutsafalêld mourning, or lamentation for; grieving for.
khutsafal6 - 9N-, grief; sorrow; shortening.
khutsafatsa - (same as "khutshwafatsa make short"),; shorten.
khutsafetse - (same as "khutshwafetse"), has made short; has shortened.
khutsakan6 - a cursing (mutual), very intensely.
khutsana - an orphan; a fatherless or motherless child, or both; one stricken with grief; a person of low degree.
khutšha - imitative of kneeling quickly or falling down on the knees.
khutšhama - kneel; fall down on the knees.
khutšhamisa - cause to fall down on the knees; kneel.
khutšhamisitse - has caused to fall down on the knees; kneel.
khutšhamisiwa - being caused to fall down on the knees; kneel.
khutšhamiwa - knelt on.
khutšhana - is kneeling; knelt; has fallen down on the knees; has knelt.
khutshane - s. same as khutshwane, short. /.
khutshwafala - (same as "khutsafala become short").
khutshwafalê - 9n-,same as khutshwafald, a shortening.
khutshwafatsa - (same as "khutsafatsa"), make short; shorten.
khutshwafatse - (same as "khutsafetse"), has become short; has shortened.
khutshwane - s., short.
khuts6 - curse.
khwaana - albumen; the white of an egg.
khwaana ya letsae - the white of an egg.
khwantsê - has knocked at the door once; has run gently; has trotted, etc.
khwanya - tap or rap once.
khwanyakhwantsê - < khwanyakhwanya has knocked; has knocked, several times.
khwanyakhwanya - knock, tap or rap repeatedly.
khwata - same as khwatsa, become pale or pallid; alter in appearance, as from sickness or anger.
khwatile - has altered in appearance, etc.
khwatlafetse - has become dwarfed.
khwatlagala - become dwarfed.
khwatsa - (same as "khwata"), become pale or pallid; alter in appearance.
khweba - a game in which certain plants are pierced and lifted up with a stick.
khwena - the worm or caterpillar that is found in a cocoon sticking on a branch, said to be used as an arrow poison. khwibitshwanyana apjJ.s. slightly red.
khwiga - become sprained, or dislocated.
khwigile - has become sprained, or dislocated.
khwila - sprain, or dislocate [doubtful].
khwitsê - has sprained, or dislocated [p].
khwitswê - be sprained.
kia - root up.
kiba - (same as "isiba"), kaba and thiba, plug; stop a hole, ete.
kiba - make a bumping noise; thud.
kibana - êga, become plugged; become deaf. 1p. Expr, go kibana ditsêbê, to become deaf.
kibêga - (same as "kibana").
kibêgile - has become plugged; is plugged.
kibikibi inTERs - 9n-, of calling poultry; small sweet corn.
kibile - has plugged; has stopped a hole.
kibisa - caused or helped to stop a hole.
kibisitse - has helped to stop a hole.
kibisiwa - (same as "kibiswa being helped to plug").
kibiswa - (same as "kibisiwa").
kibitla - run hard; run up and down.
kibitlile - has run hard; has run up and down.
kibiwa - (same as "kijwa"), being plugged; being stopped, as a hole or leak.
kidibalê - a fainting fit; a faint.
kidibi - a boy's game, in which a wild melon is rolled along and pierced with a pointed stick as it rolls past.
kidiki - 9N-, sin. oF dikidiki, the cervical vertebra; the bone at the back of the neck.
kijwa - (same as "kibiwa"), being plucked.
kika - a mortar; the hollowed-out wooden block or pounding block.
kikitla - (same as "refela"), be too difficult.
kilanôê - mutual hatred.
kile - once upon a time; denotes an act that has taken place in the past; re kile ra feta fa, we once passed by here.
kilêl6 - contempt; hatred; the observance of a sacred rite or duty; the setting of anything apart as taboo; a taboo.
kilets6 - an interdict; a prohibition.
kima - s., thick; stout.
kimeldê - a burden; heaviness.
kina - (same as "khina"), shackle.
kinamêl6 - similar to mokgokologa, which is commonly used; a slope.
kinane - fable; myth; legend; riddles, etc.
kioseke - 90-, kiosk [borrowed].
kirieditse - has pacified an infant.
kirietsa - (same as "kuruêtsa"), pacify an infant.
kirikêtê - (For), cracker; firework.
kitikiti pri - of a falling thing.
kitla_v.s - FUT. TENSE, Shall or will; used only in NEG. constructions; ga a kitla a mmona, he will not see him.
kitla - or a stick.
kitlaka - strike much, or many times.
kitlana - crowd together; become compact; come close together, or become friends, etc.
kitlanngwa - being made compact, or crowded, etc.
kitlantsê - has made compact or crowded, etc.
kitlantswê - has been framed or joined tightly together with; join tightly together.
kitlanya - make compact; crowd things together.
kitlanye - have brought together.
kitlanye - have struck one another with fists.
kitlanyetsa - crowd together for, etc.
kitlêga - capable of being hit; become hit.
kitlegile - was hit and suffered pain.
kitlêla - strike with a fist, etc., for.
kitlile - struck, or has struck with a fist.
kitlisa - or help to hit.
kitlisitse - has caused or helped to be struck with a fist; has caused or helped to strike at, with a fist.
kitlisitswe - has been caused to be struck with a fist.
kitliwa - being struck with a fist.
kitsets6 - 9N-, DIAL. VAR. OF kiletso, an interdict; a prohibition.
kitsetsopele - 9N-, know, and pele, forehead; foreknowledge.
kitsi - (same as "kitshine (FoR"), kitchen.
kitsis6 - 9N-, information; notice; announcement.
kits6 - knowledge.
ko LOC - PREF. Same as kwa, at; in the vicinity of; from; to. n.B. that the preceding v.plays a significant role as to the choice of the English preposition counterpart; ke ya kwa gae, 1am going (to) home; ke kwa gae, Iam (at) home; ke tswa gae I come (from) home.
ko - AND ID. EXPR, tap; knock; announcing an intention to come in; announcing one's presence, or arrival.
ko - (same as "ke"), polite imp. expresses politeness, or please, a o ko o bênê, please do see, or just have a look.
koa - heap up; make a heap; not in common use.
koafaditse - has made weak.
koafala - become weak; be weak.
koafatsa - weaken; make weak.
koafetse - has weakened.
koagana - become a heap.
koaganya - gather together; make into a heap.
koaganye - is gathered together; is made into a heap.
koama - Stay put, as a group of waiting people; be kept waiting, as a group; become heaped; assemble in expectation.
koame - has stayed put, as a group of waiting people.
koamêla - etc., for.
koametse - has stayed put etc., for.
koamisa - make a group of people, or animals to remain in one place for a long time, etc.
koamisitse - has made an individual stay in one place for a long time.
koamisiwa - (same as "koamiswa"), being made to stay in one place for a long time.
kêba - look around; turn aside to stare sternly at; bend wire, etc.
koba - (same as "/êlêka"), chase; drive away with contempt; despise.
koba - (same as "uta"), become mouldy or mildewed.
koba mosi - send out smoke; strike against, but not penetrate, as an arrow or spear; be blunt or bent, as a spear point; bent in, as the crown of a soft felt hat.
kobaka - become very mouldy in large amounts.
kobakoba - chase, or run after a lot.
kêbakêba - look round; look all over.
kobakobana - (same as "kobana chase one another"), or run after each other.
kêbakobana - (same as "kdbana look around at one another repeatedly").
kobakona - a species of large, very long-horned rhinoceros.
kobalete - (For), cobalt.
kêbamêl6 - worship; a bowing down to worship.
kobana - chase one another.
kêbana - look around at one another.
kêbane - have chased one another.
kobane - have looked around at one another.
kôbê - bark on a hook, or spear; lerumê ja kêbê, a barbed spear.
kobeditse - similar to taitse, has milked a cow or goat a second time, etc.
kobêga - capable of being expelled.
kôbêga - be looked at.
kobegile - has become expelled.
kobegile - kdbêga, has been looked at.
kobêla - drive away, or chase for.
kôbêla - look around for or at; work with wire; limp.
kobêsê - 9N-,same as kgobalêd, a hindrance; a fault; an impediment; lameness.
kobetsa - make a patient inhale medicinal smoke; treat with fumes from burning medicine; burn incense.
kobetsa - similar to taila, milk a cow, or goat a second time; drain a cow, or goat after its young one has sucked; milk out the last drop.
kêbetse - has looked around for or at; has worked with wire.
kobetse - has driven away, or chased for.
kobetswe - has been driven away for; has been expelled for.
kobi - a hook.
kôbile - has looked around; has bent wire ete.
kobile - has become mouldy.
kobile - has driven away with contempt.
kêbisa - make to look around; help to bend something.
kobisa - make or cause to be mouldy.
kobisa - make to chase something; help to chase.
kêbisitse - has made to look around; has helped to bend.
kobisitse - has made something to be chased.
kôêbisiwa - be made to look around.
kobisiwa - being made to be chased.
kobisiwa - being made to turn mouldy.
kobis6 - expectation; hope.
kobiwa - be chased, or expelled.
kobê - a blanket; a robe; a kaross. pRov., lomaê lo lo ntlha pedi lo lo tlhabang kobo le moroki.
kobo - AND ID. ExPR, Of striking, as a snake biting; of striking, as with a hammer; a precise knock.
kobê ya matlalê - a kaross; a skin oak or mantle.
kobêditelele - rich.
kobola - strike at with hard missiles.
kobolana - strike at one another with solid missiles.
kobonya - look round, or at the back; feel the pulse of; knock; tap.
kobota - (same as "thuga"), pound.
kobêtlê - (same as "raka"), a cupboard; a shelf; rack [borrowed].
kobotwê - ¢-, a useless person, or animal, through age, or infirmity.
kobuediwa - being scattered etc.
kobuêla - similar to Joka, throw up; scatter by throwing up; sprinkle, as salt on meat; cast.
kobuetsa - fumigate; scatter dust; sprinkle with flour.
kodu - a voice particularly a thick one; the area under the chin; neck glands; tonsil; adam's apple.
koduafala - (same as "ota"), which is commonly used, become lean.
koduafetse - (same as "bopama"), has become lean.
kodukêma - adam's apple.
kodumeditse - has swallowed all the liquid; has drunk and drained the remainder; has caused to descend.
kodumêla - descend, as a sudden fall ina path.
kodumeletsa - drink and drain the remainder for.
kodumetsa - swallow all of a liquid; drink the remainder; gulp down everything; cause to descend.
kodumetse - has descended as a sudden fall in a path.
koduntwane - dikoduntwane same as kodutê or koloti, a tadpole.
koduôl6 - the small hollow at the base of the skull and the back of the neck. 1p. Expr, go naya kodudlê, or go ruladisa koduêlê, to turn the back.
kodute - (same as "koduntwane").
koêga - become gathered; become heaped up.
koêgêla - êga, become gathered for; become heaped up for.
koegile - has become gathered or heaped up.
koêla - make a heap for. NB. distinction between koêla and koêgêla is very fine.
koetse - has made a heap for.
kogantsê - has gathered together, etc.
kojana - vim. oF kobê a small kaross, blanket or oak.
kôkêg6 - 9N-, an attraction.
kokêgê - lightness of othing; a scantiness of apparel; half-osing of a door.
kokeletso - an addition; interest on money; morokotso, is in vogue as meaning interest on money, etc.
kôkêl6 - 9N-, hospital.
kôkêlwana - inic.
koketso - an adding; addition; an increasing; an increment.
kôk6_ - 9N-, a betrayal; a caring for the sick.
koko - a domestic fowl.
kokoa - (same as "kokoanya"), which is more frequently used; bring together.
kokoana - gather by coming together; assemble; gather; come together in numbers.
kokoanêla - gather by coming together for.
kokoanetse - has gathered by coming together for.
kokoanngwa - being gathered, or assembled, together.
kokoan6 - a gathering; an assembly.
kokoantsê - has gathered together.
kokoanya - bring together; gather together people, animals or things.
kokoanye - have come together; have gathered together; have assembled.
kokoanyetsa - bring together for; gather together for; crowd together at.
kokoba - (same as "khokhoba"), walk with sore feet.
kokobaditswe - has been caused to float lightly; has been made buoyant.
kokobadiwa - being made to float; being made buoyant, etc.
kokobala - be buoyant; float; press, or lie, lightly upon.
kokobalêla - press, or lie lightly for.
kokobaletse - cause to be buoyant for, etc.
kokobatsa - make buoyant; cause to float, etc.
kokobeditse - has caused to stoop; has brought low; has struck, or shot a near object.
kôkêbêla - become pacified, or quietened; settle down quietly; become assuaged, as a flood.
kokobeletsa - êla, pacify, or quieten for; lower a thing for.
kokobetsa - cause to stoop; bring low; pacify; make calm.
kokobetse - has quieted down; has become assuaged.
kokobetse - float; has floated.
kokoile - has gathered up.
kôkôla - cochlea.
kôkôla_ - a rusk; a nut whose kernel has been removed.
kokola - 6la harrow; gather weeds together, etc.
kokologa - (same as "kgokologa roll along"), as a ball.
kokologile - has rolled along as a ball.
kokolohutwê - 99-, and dikokolohutwe, a heron; a crane.
kokolosa - (same as "kgokolosa"), roll a thing along the ground; cause a thing to roll along.
kokolositse - (same as "kgokolositse"), has rolled a thing along the ground.
kokoma - a great grandchild.
kokomaditse - has made to sit and wait a long time.
kokomaditswe - has been made to sit and wait for a long time.
kokomadiwa - being made to sit and wait for a long time.
kokomala - sit and wait for a long time in vain.
kokomalê - a waiting, or lingering; a sitting on one's heels, waiting.
kokomatsa - cause or make to sit and wait for a long time or in vain; honour (pj, in this connection, similar to tlotlomatsa.
kokometse - has sat on one's heels waiting; has sat and waited for a long time.
kokomoga - rise, or swell out, as dough rising.
kokomore - 1A9-, a woodpecker.
kokomosa - cause to rise or swell out, etc.
kokomosisa - 1nr., < kokomosa, cause to rise intensively, or swell out much.
kokomositse - has caused to rise, or swell out much.
kokomosiwa - being caused to rise, or swell out.
kokona - pick a bone. 1D. EXxPR, seaparê se amo kokona, he looks smart in the garment.
kokonaka - pick many bones, or much.
kokonêga - become picked, as a bone.
kokonêgêla - êga, become picked for.
kokonegile - has become picked like a bone.
kokonêla - pick a bone for; cause discomfort to, as a chair with a hard seat.
kokonetse - has picked a bone for; has caused one discomfort, like a chair with a hard seat.
kokonnê - has picked a bone.
kokonngwa - being knocked tapped, or rapped, as a door.
kokontsê - has knocked, or tapped.
kokontsha - help or cause to knock.
kokontshitse - has helped or caused to knock.
kokontshiwa - has been helped or caused to knock.
kokonya - knock, tap, or rap on the door; announce one's arrival by knocking at the door, or by a vocal sign.
kokonyeditse - has knocked at the door for, or of.
kokonyediwa - (same as "kokonyetswa"), being knocked at the door for; being signalled for permission to allow entry of.
kokonyetsa - knock, tap, or rap on the door for; request permission to be allowed in.
kôkôpêla - stand firm and overcome, as a successful disputant, or an army when attacked.
kokopetse - has helped a man who has been worsted in an argument by giving him suggestions.
kokoradisiwa - (same as "kokoradiswa"), being caused to be arched, like a dog's back.
kokoraditse - has caused to be arched, like a dog's back.
kokoraditswe - has been caused to arch, like the back of a dog.
kokorala - be arched, like a dog's back; walk proudly; put on airs; usurp authority.
kokoralaka - be very arched, like a dog's back.
kokoralêla - like a dog's back.
kokoraletse - is arched for display pride towards.
kokoratsa - (same as "kokoradisa"), cause to be arched like a dog's back; pack things loosely and not compactly.
kokoreditse - has surrounded; has encircled; has clucked, as a hen after laying.
kokorêga - be packed not compactly but rather loosely.
kokoregile - has packed not in a compact manner.
kokoretsa - encircle; cluck, as a hen after laying.
kokoretse - become arched like a dog's back.
kokorieditse - has handled carefully. kêkôrêga_v.s. simp. walk with lordly tread; put on airs and go about one's business; set up the back, as savage dog ready to spring; move about with pride to display power.
kêkêrêgaka - walk about with lordly tread; put on airs, as well as stride about.
kêkôrêgêla - walk with lordly tread for.
kokorogetse - has walked with lordly tread for.
kokorogile - has walked with lordly tread.
kokorogisa - cause to walk with lordly, or proud tread.
kokorogisitse - has caused to walk with lordly, or proud tread.
kokorogisiwa - being caused to walk with a lordly tread.
kôkôrêpana - (same as "kurupana corrugate"),; crimp; make wrinkles in.
kôkôrôpane - has become wrinkled in, or shrivelled.
kêkêta - (same as "kokonya"), knock, tap, or rap on the door, etc.; announce one's arrival or entry by knocking at the door, or by a vocal sign.
kôkôtaka - knock, tap, or rap much; knock a lot.
kêkôtêga - become nailed, as a wooden structure; capable of being knocked.
kokôtêgêla - ôkôtêga, respond to hammered into, as a nail in wood; becoming nailed, as a wooden structure.
kokotegile - has become nailed, as a wooden structure; has become successfully knocked, as a door.
kêkôtêla - (same as "kêkôthêla"), knock at the door of, or for; nail (actively) to; knock in, as a peg or nail.
kêkôtêlana - knock outside each other's door; give evidence that mutually puts two people into trouble.
kokotetse - has knocked for or at; has nailed; has incriminated.
kêkôthêla - (same as "kêkôtêla"), which is more commonly used, knock at the door of; nail (actively) to; knock in, as a peg, or a nail.
kokothetse - (same as "kokotetse"), has knocked for, or at; has nailed; has incriminated.
kokotisa - cause or help to knock.
kokotisitse - has caused or helped to knock.
kokotisiwa - being caused or helped to knock.
kokotiwa - being knocked.
kêkêtla - as a bird; hop on one leg as children at play; run, as a large bird.
kokotledisa - help to support; help to pray.
kokotledisitse - has caused or helped to accumulate; has caused to support; has helped to pray.
kokotledisiwa - being caused or helped to accumulate; being helped to support.
kokotleditse - has supported; has accumulated; has supplied with food.
kokotlediwa - being accumulated; being supported.
kokotlêgêla - êla, become accumulated; abound; become numerous; be prosperous; increase gradually.
kokotlêgêl6 - 9N-, an accumulation; prosperity.
kokotlegetse - became accumulated, etc.
kôkôtlêla - beg eagerly; supplicate for; crave; importune.
kokotleleditse - has accumulated for.
kôkôtlêlêla - ôkôtlêla, same as kokotlêgêla, accumulate for; pray for.
kokotleletsa - accumulate for.
kokotlêlêtse - similar to kokotlegetse, has prayed for; has accumulated for.
kokotletsa - support; hold up; accumulate; supply with food.
kokotletse - has prayed; has supported.
kokotlwantsê - corrugated.
kokwaêla - lay hold of both arms, or legs; has folded arms and legs around, as a baby.
kokwaetsa - has laid hold of both arms, or legs; has folded arms and legs around, as a baby.
kokwana - chick; chicken.
kokwane - (same as "kokoane").
kokwanêla - (same as "kokoanêla"), gather by coming together for.
kokwan6 - 9N-, same as kokoanê, a gathering; an assembly.
kokwata s - turned-down horns; horns being fast (of an animal) (pj.
kola - a head ornament made of a feather, a hare's tail, etc.; a winner's symbol.
kolane - (same as "setlôwana or thapê"), an umbilical cord.
kolo - a little ball; a ball bearing; a small white spot on an animal's forehead.
koloagana - make an agreement.
koloaganê - an agreement.
koloaganye - has made an agreement.
kdêlêba - become wet.
kêlêbaka - become very wet; become wet all over.
kolobê - 1A9- AND 9N-, and dikolobê, a pig, including wild pig; a swine.
kolobê ya naga - tsa naga, a wild pig.
kolobeditse - has made wet; has moistened; has baptised.
kolobediwa - being baptised; being moistened.
kôlôbêla - be moistened for.
kolobeletsa - ôlôbêla, baptise for, or at; moisten for.
kolobetsa - moisten; baptise.
kolobetsê - 9n-, christening; baptism; a baptising.
kolobile - be wet; has become wet.
kolobisa - (same as "kolobetsa"), make thoroughly wet; saturate with moisture; soften by moistening.
kolobisitse - has made thoroughly wet; has saturated with moisture.
kolobisiwa - being made thoroughly wet; being saturated with moisture, same as kolobediwa.
kolobu - (same as "tolobu"), of falling into water, by a small object. np. size is relative.
kôlôf6 - 90, (FoR, golf.
koloi - a wagon; a vehicle such as a motor car, lorry, etc.
kolojane - piM. < kolobê, a suckling pig.
kolokhutwe - 1A9- AND 9N-, and dikolokhutwe, heron; crane, same as kokolohutwe.
kolokitisa - (same as "kgolokgothisa"), make a wheel roll.
kololôê - an animal supposed to be found in the hills, probably the original name for a horse.
kolomeditse - has panted.
kêlêmêla - disappear over the brow of a hill; fall suddenly, as a path.
kolone - |For}, colony.
kolopa - throw a missile; fire a shot at; bewitch.
kolota - owe; be allowed to take goods and pay for them later.
kolotaka - owe much, etc.
kolotana - owe each other.
kolotêla - borrow for; take goods to pay later for.
koloti - (same as "koduntwane and kodute"), a tadpole.
kolotile - has borrowed, etc.
kolotisa - cross-examine; lend money to.
kolotisitse - has allowed to take goods to pay later.
kolotisitswe - has been allowed to take goods and to pay later; has been cross-questioned.
kolotisiwa - (same as "kolotiswa being allowed to take goods and then pay later").
kolotiwa - kolotwa, being borrowed from particularly money being owed.
kolotsana - (same as "sekotsekara"), scotch cart.
kolotsana ya ga ritšha - rickshaws.
koma - a song of truimph; a guide. w. Expr, go ja koma, rejoice over a victory.
koma - the bulrush; apyrus plant. ve tee lick; act of licking with the tongue at powderly substances, as sugar, salt, ete.
koma mmu - be disgraced.
komagantsê - has burst asunder.
komaganya - burst asunder.
komaka - lick much; lick often.
komaka - moan much owing to excessive pain.
komakoma - rain in gentle showers; drizzle.
komakomeditse - has tantalised.
kêmakêmêla - êmakêma, glory over another; boast over another; tease by boasting over.
komakometsa - (same as "konkometsa"), which is commonly used; tantalise by offering something and then refusing to give it.
komakometse - has gloried or boasted over another.
komakomile - has drizzled; has rained gently.
kêmang - contention; quarrel.
kêmanê - contention; a noisy row.
kêmany6 - ING. oF dikômany6, a scolding.
komaê - a stone.
komeditse - has swallowed quickly, especially something small.
komêga - capable of being licked; be lickable.
komegile - has become licked; be licked.
komêla - boast over another as regards something; moan for.
komêla - or at the expense of.
kêmêlêl6 - drought; dryness; dry ground; constipation.
komeletsane - tusk.
kometsa - especially used of something small.
kometse - has boasted over another; has moaned for.
kometse - has licked a powder like sugar, or salt.
komisa - cause to boast; make to moan.
komisa - give a lick at powder; help or cause to lick.
komisitse - has made to boast; has led to moan.
komisitse - has made to lick.
komisitswe - has been made or caused to lick.
komisitswe - has been made to boast; has been led to moan.
komisiwa - (same as "komisiwa being made to lick").
komiswa - (same as "komiswa").
komiwa - being moaned.
komma - an artificially raised swelling.
komo - as a neck; of clean swift breaking in two.
komoga - be broken, as a neck; becoming snapped into two bits; capable of snapping into pieces, i.e. fragile, like earthenware.
komogantsê - has caused to burst, break, or snap in two, as wood, or bone.
komoganya - cause to burst break, or snap in two, as wood or bone; share out, or divide, as a loaf of bread by breaking it into portions.
komogêla - break, as a vessel to the detriment of; damage a cup, etc., by a part breaking off.
komogile - has broken, as a neck; has snapped into two bits.
komoki - a cup particularly the type of porcelain, or china [borrowed].
komola - break, or smash a bone, as does a bullet; eat thick porridge by breaking chunks by hand; eat thick porridge without relish.
komosasa - commissionary [borrowed].
komota - a stump; a trunk of a baby without legs.
komotsê - has broken, or smashed a bone as a bullet.
kêmpa - (same as "kutu trunk of tree or body"),; a large pot.
kêna - bend; do work; bow, as the head.
kona - finish with a border, as a basket ete.
kênal6 - wearing-out of a dress, shoe, etc.; the action of being worn out gradually.
kênama - bending, or bowing down hence being very busy.
kêname - be bent, or bowed down.
kênamêla - be bent, or bowed down for.
kênamisa - make to bend, or bow down.
kênamisitse - has made to bend, or has caused to bow down.
kênamisiwa - being made to bend, or being caused to bow down.
kênamiwa - or bowed.
kênatêlêla - pursue; follow after perseveringly; do anything with a will.
kôênateletse - has pursued; has followed after perserveringly.
kênêga - become bent; bulge; have greenstick fracture.
kênêgêla - ênêga, becoming bent for.
konegile - be bent, or bulged.
konêla - bend, or bow for; conclude, as at the end of a speech or in making an item of cloth, or wool.
kônêl6 - a knot, or loop; a state of making a knot; a conclusion.
kong Loc - 3RD Pos., same as koo, there.
kêngwa - (same as "komiwa"), being moaned.
kongwa - (same as "komiwa"), being licked.
kongwakongwane - a separate group, or portion.
kongwane - a bush with usters of yellowish flowers; probably Gnidia polycephala.
konkamba - horned cucumber; jelly melon; Cucurbi taceae.
konkomeditse - has tantalised by offering then withholding.
konkomeletsa - tantalise for, or with.
konkometsa - tantalise by offering something and then refusing to give it; tantalise a person, or an animal by sight of, or promise of desired thing by withholding, or keeping it just out of reach.
konkometsana - tantalise one another, by offering something and then refusing to give | it. | konkomi prim. 1D. Expr, said when tantalising | someone by offering something and then | withholding it.
kênkênyêga - flow out profusely. | kênkênyêgile v.s. prr, has flowed out profusely. | konkopi n.ct., gain height by climbing on another; riding piggyback. | konkoreiti Nn. ct. 9N., sinc. or dikonkoreiti (ror), | concrete. | konnê v.s.pFr. < kona, has finished with a border, as a completed basket, or anything woven, or knitted.
kôn6 - a | moan, or groan.
kônôkôn6 - the most important thing, or point; the crux of the matter.
konologa - become straightened.
konolola - unfasten a knot made in sewing; unfasten the riem of a pack Ox.
konolotsê - has straightened; has unfastened a knot, etc.
kênoôn6 - first vertebra; atlas.
konopa - hurl; throw at; hit by throwing; fire a rifle; bewitch.
konopana - «Ec. hurl at each other; throw at each other; bewitch one another.
konopêga - capable of being hurled; become hurled.
konopêla - throw for, or to.
konopetse - has thrown at; has bewitched for.
konopile - has thrown; has hit by throwing.
konopisitse - has caused or helped to throw at.
konopisitswe - has been caused or helped to throw at, etc.
konopisiwa - being caused or helped to throw at.
konopiwa - being bewitched.
konopê - button; buckle; a stud [borrowed].
kônôtêlêla - (same as "kênatêlêla"), do with a will.
kontinêntê - 9N., dikontinêntê, continent [borrowed].
kontse - has tapped; has given very little.
konu_ - tinder; touchwood. Konya v.s.simp.,tap, or rap once; give very little.
konyakonya - knock several times.
konyeditse - tapped, or rapped once for; given very little.
konyetsa - tap for; give very little to.
ko6 - a falling.
koo LOc - 3RD Pos, same as kong, there.
koolola - obtain plenty of things from a large store; reduce the size of a heap of things.
kooteng - probably; maybe.
kôpa - copy.
kopa - beg; ask for.
kopa - skip; jump; hop.
kopa-dilalêl6 - bokopa-dilalêlê the evening star. np. the used when refering to kopa-dilalêlê and other stars.
kêpaka - y much.
kopaka - beg much; beg many times.
kopaka - jump many times.
kopakopa - as when rope-skipping; jump about; hop repeatedly.
kêpana - y each other; imitate each other.
kêpana - meet together; unite.
kopana - ask for mutually.
kêpanêla - meet for or, at; share a thing.
kopanetse - met at or over an issue; do or share jointly.
kêpan6 - a meeting together; a joining; an agreeing; unity.
kopantsê - has united or caused to unite; has mixed.
kopantsha - meet someone arriving; encounter.
kopantshana - meet each other.
kopantshiwa - (same as "kopantshwa"), being met.
kopantswê - has been united or made to meet.
kopanya - cause to meet; unite; mix.
kopanye - have met; is mixed.
kopaopa - AND 5 le-, and mapaopa, a species of crested bird that nests in hollow tree trunks.
kopedisa - help to button or lock; button tightly or quickly.
kopedisitse - has helped to button.
kopedisiwa - being helped to button.
kêpêga - iable.
kopêga - give freely and easily when begged.
kêpêla - lock; button, as a coat; fasten with a lock, as a door.
kopêla - beg for; beg to pass on to.
kopêla - skip, hop or jump for.
kêpêlaka - lock or button.
kêpêlana - beg for one another.
kêpêlana - y from one another.
kêpêlana - etc., for one another.
kêpêlêga - lockable; become fastened, as a lock.
kopelegile - is locked; has become locked.
kopeletse - êpêla, button for.
kôpêl6 - veEr.F. kêpêla same as seldtê, a lock.
kêpêl6 - hymnal; songbook; a singing.
kôpêlwane - pen knife.
kopere - quince [borrowed].
kopetse - begged for the sake of.
kêpetse - copied for one another.
kopetse - has locked or buttoned.
kopetse - has skipped, etc.
kopetswe - has been locked.
kopi - cup [borrowed].
kopile - has begged; has asked for.
kopile - has copied.
kopile - has skipped.
kopisa - cause or help to beg.
kopisa - cause or help to copy.
kopisa - cause or help to skip, etc.
kopisitse - has caused or helped to copy.
kopisitse - has caused or helped to skip, ete.
kopisiwa - (same as "kopiswa being caused or helped to beg").
kopisiwa - (same as "kopiswa being caused or helped to copy").
kopisiwa - (same as "kopiswa being caused or helped to skip"), etc.
kopiswa - (same as "kopisiwa being caused or helped to beg").
kopiswa - (same as "kopisiwa").
kopiwa - being skipped.
kôp6 - %., dikdpêd, pulse; beating; | pulsation. |.
kôp6 - a hare's tail.
kop6 - request; supplication; application.
kopo s - overhanging, as a rock. 'kopola v.s.sip.,make a nick ona stick or weapon, etc., in order to keep count.
kopologa - become unbuttoned; be unlocked.
kopologile - is unbuttoned; is unlocked or unclasped.
kopolola - unlock; unclasp, as a folding knife.
kopololêla - unlock for; unbutton for.
kopololetse - has unlocked for.
kopolotsê - has unlocked.
kopore - [, copper. kora_v.s. SIMP., Score [borrowed].
koranta - ¢., newspaper [borrowed].
korile - has scored.
kêrê - meal which sinks to the bottom of the pot when poured in before the water has boiled.
korola - aim at; be on target, as when aiming a gun at.
koroladitse - has bent or made to bend.
koroladiwa - being like a bow.
korolala - like a bow.
korolatsa - make something bent; bend.
koroletse - is bent, like a bow.
korone - Crown [borrowed].
korong - wheat. kêrêpa vV.s.SIMP., scrub [borrowed].
kêrêpagana - (same as "kêkêrdpana become bent or doubled up"), like a sick thing.
kêrêpaganye - has become bent or doubled up.
korosa - a fever; malaria [archaic], S¢e febara and letshoroma [borrowed].
korotlile - etc.
kôrwê - a hornbill.
kêta - log; block of wood.
kêta - Sit on the haunches instantly; crouch instantly.
kêta - ulate, said of a cock.
kêtaka - ulate often, said of a cock.
kotama - crouch; squat; sit on the haunches; sit or perch, as an insect.
kotamaka - sit a lot on the haunches.
kotamana - Sit or perch on each other.
kotame - has sat or perched.
kotamêla - sit on the haunches for; perch for.
kotametse - has sat on the haunches for; has perched for.
kotamisa - cause or help to perch, as a bird or land, as an airplane.
kotamisitse - has made to crouch, perch or land, as an airplane, etc.
kotamisiwa - being made to crouch, etc.
kotamiwa - being landed.
kôtana - a stump.
kêtana - ulate mutually (said of fowls birds, etc.).
kêtara - quarter; quota [borrowed].
kêtedisa - help chase or drive off a calf when milking its mother.
kêtêga - be mated with.
kotêkeditse - has made music.
kêtêla - drive off a calf when milking its mother; keep a calf at bay during milking. PROV, o gama a ikêtêlêla.
kêtêlaka - be busy driving off a calf when milking its mother.
kotêlêga - be resigned to a cow's calf being stopped from continuing to suck while milking is in progress; allow itself (a calf) to be prevented from sucking while its mother is being milked.
kotêlêla - drive off a calf when its mother is being milked; keep a calf at bay while its mother is being milked.
koteletse - has kept a calf at bay while its mother was being milked.
kotiwa - as fowls.
kotla - nourishment hence vitamins, manure, fertilisers.
kotla - gather together at different times or by different purchases; gather stragglers together.
kotlêla - stretch the edges of the vagina as young girls are accustomed to do.
kotletse - has stretched the edges of the vagina, as young girls are accustomed to do.
kêtlhaê - (same as "kwatlhad"), a chastening; chastisement.
kotlile - has gathered together at different times or by different purchases; has gathered stragglers together.
kotl6 - ING. oF dikotl6, sustenance or nourishment.
kôtl6 - ING. oF dikêtl6, punishment; pestilence.
kotlomana - cower; be in fear; sit curled through fear.
kotloman6 - siING. or dikotlomand, fear; dismay.
kotlomanye - is cowering in fear; be in a frightened state. kotlomanyeditse pelo 1p. Expr, has kept the heart alive. kotlomanyetsa pelo 1p. Expr, keep the heart alive.
kotlomeditse - has caused to disappear behind something; has thrown behind a wall or into a hole, etc.
kotlomêla - disappear below the horizon, as the setting sun; suffer from loss of appetite; be forgetful; be stupid.
kotlometsa - cause to disappear behind something; throw behind a wall, or into a hole, etc.
kotlometse - has caused to disappear behind something; has thrown behind a wall, or into a hole, etc.
kotlopisa - collect liquid in small quantities.
kotlopisitse - has collected liquid in small quantities.
kotlopisiwa - as with a liquid.
kôtlôp6 - a satchel; a shoulder bag, etc.
kotokwê - ¢, a grey ground squirrel with short tail.
kotosêla - talk incessantly.
kotosetse - has talked incessantly.
kêtsêl6 - sleepiness; drowsiness.
kotsi - an accident; danger.
kotsialetse - has listened to reproof humbly without answering back.
kotso - a hissing; a chirruping; hesitating. kêtswana aDjJ.s., denotes a female animal that is various tints of grey in colour; grey effect made by speckles of black on white; a reddish-brown speckled effect.
kotudile - (same as "kotutsê or robile"), less frequently used, has reaped; has harvested.
kotula - (same as "rêba"), reap.
kotutsê - has reaped; has harvested, more frequently used.
kouma - dose.
kua - shout; scream; proclaim with a loud voice; bay or howl of a dog; yelp, as a wild dog; produce smoke, as a fire.
kuaka - shout a lot; bay or howl a lot, as a dog, etc.
kuana - a small leather sack, made of one skin; a wallet; a satchel.
kuana - shout out at or for one another; proclaim to one another with loud voices.
kuane - similar to puane a cap or hat; a woman's skin cap, worn traditionally at the marriage of well-to-do families.
kuane - has shouted; has bayed or howled, said of a dog, etc.
kuanye - have shouted at one another; has bayed or howled, as of a dog, ete.
kuarabane s - not frequently used, similar to humanêga, poor.
kuba - come out, as dust out of a beaten skin or carpet; rise up, as smoke; weed. kuba mangdlê v. pur, same as kêba, be slightly bow-legged; become mouldy, or mildewy.
kubakuba - trot.
kubakubile - has trotted.
kubedisa - fumigate; treat with smoke or incense; punch or poke.
kubeditse - has fumigated, or treated with smoke or incense; has punched or poked in the area of the tummy.
kubediwa - (same as "kobetswa"), being fumigated, or treated with incense; being punched with a blunt object.
kubêga - become blunt; have hiccoughs; have guilty conscience; become slightly bent, as knees in presenting a shield.
kubêla - handle of a knife or a fist; shake forcibly, as a milk sack so as to extract the milk; shake a milk sack when the whey has been drawn off.
kubêlêla - as a milk sack so as to extract the milk for; shake a milk sack when the whey has been drawn off for; hit with an arrow, etc., without it penetrating.
kubeletse - has shaken forcibly, etc.; has hit with an arrow, etc., without penetrating the thing struck.
kubetsa - to fumigate with smoke; knock body with something blunt.
kubigile - has woken out of sleep, etc.
kubile - has weeded; is stale and mouldy.
kubitla - as a bad runner; walk with a shaky gait, as an old or weak person.
kubitlile - as a bad runner; has walked with a shaky gait, as an old or weak person.
kubolola - unbend the knees, etc.
kubolotsê - has straightened the knees, etc.
kubu - a hippopotamus; a sjambok.
kubueditse - has caused to be thrown up; has caused to be sprinkled on, as salt on meat.
kubuetse - has thrown up; has scattered by throwing up, etc.
kubuga - wake out of sleep; get out of bed early.
kubugêla - charge up to; get out of bed very early.
kubugetse - has charged up to.
kudubitlêga - move about quickly; flee from place to place [archaic]. }.
kudubitlegile - has moved about quickly; has fled from place to place.
kuduêla - DIAL. VAR. OF kubuêla, thrown on, as dust.
kuduetse - DIAL. VAR OF kobuetse, has thrown dust, etc.
kuduketlwane - (same as "moreku"), used of a male; masturbation.
kudumedi - 9N-, a tumult [D}.
kudunka - dig very hard ground.
kudunkile - has dug very hard ground.
kudupana - to bend, as in pain.
kudupantsê - has made to be bent, as in pain.
kudupanya - made to bend, as in pain.
kudupanye - is bent, as in pain.
kuêlêla - Shout at, in a derisive manner; shout for; smoulder.
kuêlêlana - shout at each other ina derisive manner.
kueletse - has shouted at in a derisive manner.
kuetse - has proclaimed or reported to, or for.
kufutu - crowbar [borrowed].
kuisa - cause to shout out; cause to proclaim; cause to howl, or yelp, as a dog.
kuisitse - has caused to shout out ete.
kuisiwa - being caused to shout out, ete.
kuiwa - being shouted at; being proclaimed or made known.
kuka - lift up; carry a child on back or hip.
kukaka - lift up something heavy; carry a thing about.
kukama - a gemsbok.
kukamana - a young gemsbok.
kukana - lift each other up.
kukara - (same as "khulara"), a pelican (Dj.
kukeditse - has lit a fire; has poured oil on trouble waters.
kukêga - liftable; capable of being lifted.
kukêgile - is lifted.
kukêla - lift for.
kukêla - smoulder; burn without blazing.
kuketsa - light a fire; cause a fire, as with a piece of dry dung.
kuketse - be burning.
kukisa - cause or help to lift.
kukisitse - has caused or helped to lift.
kukisiwa - being helped to lift.
kukona - commonly pronounced as kukuna, pick a bone.
kuku - cake.
kukubala - (same as "phatloga"), crack, as a smooth floor or wall.
kukubetse - has cracked, as a smooth floor or wall.
kukumologa - rise above the horizon used of clouds; rise as dough.
kukumologile - has risen above the horizon.
kukuna - stoop down; approach stealthily; creep in a stooping posture.
kukunama - meat pie.
kukunêla - creep at; stalk.
kukunetse - has crept; has stalked or approached stealthily.
kukunê6 - stealthy movements; promiscuity.
kukuntsha - etc.; bring to birth.
kukuntshitse - has caused to bud, or peep out of soil, etc.
kukuntshiwa - being caused to bud, or peep out of soil, etc.
kukunya - appear above the surface; peep out, as a tree's buds.
kukunyeditse - has neighed as a distant horse.
kukunyetsa - appear above the surface for.
kukunyetsa - as horse at a distance.
kukurala - (same as "kokorala"), bend up. Kokorala is commonly used.
kukutla - (same as "khukhutha"), walk slowly with a stoop. Khukhutha is commonly used.
kukutlhomolola - to uproot.
kuma - bite a bit off; break up, as a piece of flimsy paper.
kumagana - into parties or groups.
kumaganngwa - being broken up into pieces, groups or parties.
kumagantsê - has broken up into small pieces, as bread, etc.
kumagantswê - has been broken up, etc.
kumaganya - break up into small pieces as bread, etc.
kumaganye - has broken up or has become broken up, into pieces, groups or parties.
kumaganyeditse - has broken up, etc., for.
kumaganyetsa - break up, etc., for.
kumakê - a mention; an allusion.
kumakuma - carry a very big and unwieldy load on one's back.
kumakumêla - carry a very big and unwieldy load for.
kumakumile - 's back.
kumakumisa - help or cause to carry an unwieldy load on one's back.
kumakumiwa - 's back, as a very unwieldy load.
kumêga - become torn up or broken up as a piece of flimsy paper; be notched, as a knife.
kumegile - is torn or broken up, as a piece of flimsy paper.
kumêtse - has bitten a bit off for.
kumpana - be shrivelled, or shrunk up into a ball.
kumuga - (same as "khumuga"), become uprooted.
kumugile - (same as "khumogile"), has become uprooted.
kumula - (same as "khumuga"), uproot.
kunama - journey down; journey in a descending direction; fall away suddenly; dig downwards.
kuname - has journeyed down to; has dug downwards.
kunamisa - make perpendicular, as when digging a hole.
kunamisitse - has made perpendicular, as in digging a hole.
kunamisiwa - (same as "kunamiswa"), being dug perpendicularly, as in digging a hole.
kunamiwa - being journeyed downwards. Kung N. cL. 9n., sinc. or dikung, a premonition; a foreboding; an ill omen.
kungwa - a fruit; a berry. kunkurw_N. roan antelope; the sound made by a dove cooing; it is imitated and made into several lullabies or children's refrains.
kunt8ane - AND 9n-,a small pot carried about when travelling.
kuntsê - restrain or has restrained.
kunya - groan.
kunya - restrain a dog or some such thing.
kunyane - a hole in an ash heap; a recess; a room in European-type house.
kuologêla - as fine dust, birds etc., for or to.
kuologetse - has dispersed, as dust, birds, etc., for or to.
kuologile - has dispersed, as dust, birds etc.
kuologê - disperse, as fine dust; dissolve as fog; disappear, as a flock of birds.
kuolola - as a fog; drive away, as birds of prey from a carcase.
kupa - (same as "Jeupa"), hot ashes without nders.
kupane - a species of edible bulb.
kupe - a large quantity of meal; hot ash; an ox set apart by its owner to die a natural death; a venerated ox, treated as a god. prov., bogosi kupe, kinghood is sacred.
kup6 - pregnancy (occurring before menstruation has been reestablished).
kuranta - %., dikoranta newspaper [borrowed].
kurofolola - unscrew.
kuru - a lullaby.
kurueditse - as a dove; has comforted or cheered by singing a lullaby for.
kurueletsa - coo as a dove; make a mournful noise for.
kuruetsa_ - coo, as a dove; sing plaintively; make a mournful noise; cry or wail, as does a baby for its mother.
kuruets6 - a cooing, as a dove; a lullaby; a plaintive tune; a doleful ditty.
kuruga - a swelling up.
kurukurwana - -, dikurukurwana, to give birth; be in labour. kurukutsa_v.s.stmp., simmer.
kurupanye - DIAL. vAR. oF kdkêrêpanye, is shrivelled, etc.
kurusa - rouse up a forgetful or negligent person; rouse up or frighten away birds.
kurusitse - has roused or frightened away.
kuruthu - a curse; a word used as a curse by a woman when striking the ground with her apron and cursing someone.
kurutla - as a lion, bear or ostrich; rumble, as the bowels from flatulence.
kurutlile - has rumbled, as the bowels from flatulence.
kurwana - a calabash; the fuel receptacle for a lantern; a small-mouthed vessel; a phial.
kusuberi - gooseberry [borrowed].
kuta - cut hair or beard; weed, in a slovenly manner.
kutaka - cut hair much; weed extensively.
kutana - cut each other's hair or beards.
kutanêla - cut for one another; weed for one another.
kutêga - fall off, as hair from head or wool from a skin; become well-shaved.
kutêgêla - as hair from the head.
kutegile - has fallen off, as hair from the head.
kuthumeditse - has tilted up and poured out, as thick milk, soil, ete.
kuthumetsa - tilt up and pour out, as thick milk, soil, etc.
kutisitse - has caused or helped to shave.
kutisiwa - being caused or helped to shave.
kutiwa - etc. kutla_N.cL.9N-, SING. OF dikutla, a lion's lair or sleeping place; a dog's sleeping place, scratched in the ground; an ostrich's nest or that of any other bird that lays eggs on the ground.
kutl6 - N., a hearing; obedience.
kutlopologa - recover composure and become industrious; come out of a daze.
kutlumeditse - (same as "kuthumeditse"), has tilted up and poured out, etc.
kutlumetsa - (same as "kuthumetsa"), tilt up and pour out, etc.
kutlwan6 - mutual sympathy; concord.
kutlwedi - a hearing; obedience; a hint; knowledge about something.
kutlwisis6 - mutual agreement.
kutu_ - (same as "thitd"), the trunk of a tree, etc.
kutuma - be loose; shake a little, as a loose tooth or a stone.
kutumaka - be very loose; shake a lot, as a loose tooth; shake to its very roots, as a tree in a windstorm.
kutumêla - be loose and shaky.
kutumetse - has shaken for.
kutumile - has shaken.
kutumisa - as a loose tooth.
kutumisitse - has caused to shake, as a loose tooth.
kutumisiwa - being made to shake, as a tree in a wind storm.
kutumiwa - as a loose tooth.
kututwê - the inner part of the anus; the lower bowel.
kutwane - vegetables in a riverbed.
kuuloga - rise up, as a cloud of dense smoke, a swarm of locusts, or a large number of birds.
kuulogêla - rise up for or to, as a cloud of dense smoke, etc.
kuulogile - as a cloud of dense smoke, etc.
kuulola - drive away, as a large number of birds, or a swarm of locusts, etc.
kuulotsê - has driven away, as a large number of birds, or a swarm of locusts, etc.
kwa LOC - PREF. Same as ko, at; from; to; NB. that the preceding v. plays a significant role as to the choice of the English preposition; ke ya kwa gae, I am going (to) home; ke kwa gae, 1 am (at) home; ke tswa kwa gae, Iam coming (from) home.
kwa_ LOC - 2ND pos, there; yonder. Ke ya kwa, I am going (to) there; it is peculiar in that it is not concordially related to subst. qual.
kwaa - a flat place on the top of a hill.
kwaakweetsa - stutter; stammer.
kwaakweetso - 9N-, an impediment of speech; a stuttering or stammering; a babbling.
kwadi - the outer skin of a goat's bowel; a musical instrument made from the outer skin of a goat's bowel.
kwadisa - cause or help to write; teach how to write; enrol; register as a member.
kwadis6 - 9N-, enrolment; registration.
kwaêla - shelter something by holding it to one's side; gather something in one's cloak and hold it to one's side; aim at, as with a gun.
kwaile - has caught sight of something hidden.
kwaisa - go into the shade; help to aim at; aim well at.
kwaisitse - has caused to take shelter, etc.
kwaisiwa - being caused to take shelter, etc.; being helped to aim at something, with a gun, etc.
kwaiwa - being sheltered from the sun or going into the shade; being detected.
kwakwaeditse - has stuttered or stammered.
kwakwaêla - to hold with arms and legs; fold arms.
kwakwaeletse - has held with arms and legs for.
kwakwaetsa - Stammer; stutter.
kwakwaetse - has stammered; has held with arms and legs. kwala vV.S.SIMP., write.
kwalakwaditse - has portrayed; has sketched figures, etc.
kwalakwatsa - sketch figures.
kwalantsê - have talked confusedly, as many people talking together.
kwalanya - talk confusedly, as many people talking together.
kwalany6 - a confusion of talk; consternation; babble; a stir.
kwalare - a solitary male wildebeest.
kwalata - a sable antelope; a roan antelope.
kwalêla - write for or to.
kwalodikgang - journalism.
kwana - (same as "kwanyana"), lamb; N. PHR,kwana ya Modimo, lamb of God.
kwanama - (same as "konama and inama which are frequently used"),; bend; hang down, as a broken bough.
kwanatla s - strong; energetic [doubtful].
kwankwetla - N., used.
kwanyakwanya - ¢-, a species of woodpecker.
kwanyana - (same as "kwana"), konyana, lamb; Nn. PHR, kwanyana ya Modimo,lamb of God.
kwata - sulk; be annoyed; become upset.
kwatabolodisa - cause or help to strip off, as bark from a tree.
kwatabolodisitse - has caused or helped to strip off, as bark from a tree.
kwatabolodisiwa - < kwatabolodisa being caused or helped to strip off, as bark from a tree.
kwataboloditse - has stripped off bark from a tree.
kwatabolodiwa - being stripped of bark.
kwatabologa - being stripped successfully.
kwatabologile - as bark from a tree.
kwatabolola - (same as "kwatabolotsa which is the older form etymologically"),; strip off, as bark from a tree. prov. dilê makwati di kwatabolotswa mo go ba bangwe.
kwatabololêla - strip bark off a tree.
kwatabololetse - has stripped bark off a tree for.
kwatabolotsa - (same as "kwatabolola"), strip off bark from a tree; shred a thing; peel.
kwatabolotsê - has stripped off bark from a tree.
kwatêla - be angry or upset with.
kwatêla - DIAL. VAR. oF kêtêla, drive away a calf when milking its mother.
kwatêlana - be angry with each other.
kwatisa - annoy; anger.
kwatlaladitse - has made stiff; has caused to pine away; has tugged and pulled tight.
kwatlaladiwa - (same as "kwatlalatswa"), being made stiff, etc.
kwatlalala - become stiff; pine away; tug and pull tight; go on talking incessantly.
kwatlalalêla - become stiff for; pine away at; tug and pull tight for.
kwatlalaletse - has become stiff for.
kwatlalalê - dikwatlalalê convulsion; rigidity.
kwatlalatsa - make stiff; cause to pine away; cause to tug and pull tight.
kwatlaletse - be stiff; has pined away, etc.
kwatlapa - be dry and hard, as a skin or riem.
kwatlapile - has dried and hardened, as a skin or riem. kwatlase apv. Pur, down; down below; the east.
kwatlha6 - n., dikwatlhad, same as kotlhad, a chastening; chastisement.
kwatobolotsa - (same as "kwatabolotsa strip off bark from a tree"),; shred a thing; peel.
kwatsi - anthrax; a carbuncle; large ulcer; syphilitic sore; ulcerating cancer.
kwaya - take shelter from the sun; go into shade; espy, or catch sight of something hidden.
kwebu - s, denotes a male animal that is various tints of grey in colour; grey effect made by speckles of black on white; a reddish-brown speckled effect; roan.
kwedile - has thrown a rider yoke or burden; has spurned, as a cow her calf.
kwedisa - cause or help to rear; cause or help to throw a rider, etc.
kwedisitse - has caused or helped to rear, etc.
kwedisiwa - being caused or helped to rear, etc.
kwediwa - being thrown, as a rider, etc.
kwela - rear, as a horse; throw a rider yoke or burden; drive away, or spurn, as a cow her calf.
kwelaka - rear a lot, as a horse; throw a rider, etc., very often.
kwele - (same as "lekwele"), and tapolê, a table potato.
kwelekwele - a long ridge.
kwelêla - as a horse for, etc.
kweletlana - be drawn up in a ridge or hump, as a bull's neck or a dry skin after being wet.
kweletlanye - has become drawn up ina ridge, etc., as a bull's neck.
kweletsa - has reared, as a horse for, etc.
kweloga - be rough, undressed, as cloth, skin, etc.
kwelogêla - rise up against.
kwelogetse - has risen up against.
kwelogile - is rough undressed, as cloth, skin, etc.
kwelwa - as does a horse.
kwena - crocodile; mame ya kwena, a true member of the kwena tribe; a species of aromatic shrub, used as tea; wild peppermint.
kwena - become thick, as darkness.
kwenêla - become strong for.
kwenesa - wound slightly.
kwenesitse - has wounded slightly.
kweneso - a wound.
kweneta - bob up and down, as a man with a load on his back.
kwenetile - has bobbed up and down.
kwennê - be thick; be dense.
kwentsha - make thick, strong or tough.
kwentshitse - has made thick or strong.
kwentshitswe - has been made thick, or strengthened.
kwentshiwa - being made thick or strong.
kwetla - hop, as a locust.
kwetlile - has hopped, as a locust.
kweto - ExPR, of appearing suddenly, as the rising moon.
kwetoga - appear; come into sight, as a person coming over a ridge; rise above the horizon, as a cloud.
kwetogêla - come to; approach to.
kwetogetse - has come to; has approached unto.
kwetogile - < has appeared or come into sight.
kwetola - cause to come into sight.
kwetsê - (same as "kwedile"), has reared.
kwetsepa - hobble about, as a cripple with a stick.
kwetsepêla - hobble about; walk with a limp. NB. The appt. FoRM could be said to bear the same meaning as the v.s. sip.
kwetsepetse - has hobbled about; is lame.
kwetsepile - has hobbled about.
kwetsepisa - cause or make to hobble.
kwetsepisitse - has made to hobble about.
kwetsepisiwa - being made to hobble about.
kwidi_ - 149-,an unknown place.
kwidia - as a wanderer; wander hither and thither.
kwidibi - species of plant with a bulbous root.
kwidiêg6 - ING. oF dikwidiêgd, unrest; restlessness.
kwidiile - has gone here and there, as a wanderer.
kwidintsê - has neighed.
kwidinyêga - make a bubbling noise, as boiling fat; neigh.
kwidinyegile - has made a bubbling noise.
kwidinyêg6 - the bubbling noise made by fat when boiling; a neighing sound.
kwiditetsa - swallow greedily.
kwitisa - run.
kwitse - %-,leather made from a young goat's skin.
