laana - instruct, or exhort one another; counsel each other.
laba - take anything foreign out of an eye with a tongue.
labile - has taken anything foreign out of an eye with a tongue. Labobedi Nn. cL. 1Ae-, sinc. oF boLabobedi, Tuesday.
laboga - start instantly.
labogile - ê n.cL.14¢, sinc. oF boLabonê, Thursday. Laboraro N.CL.1A¢-, SING. oF boLaboraro, Wednesday. Labotlhano Nn.cL.1A¢-, sinc. oF boLabotlhano, Friday.
laditse - has caused or helped to lie down; have not been watered, as cattle that go without water for a given period of time.
laditswe - has been lain down; has been made to go without water, as domestic animals.
ladiwa - (same as "latswa"), being lain down; being made to lie down; being made to go without water for a day or a longer period of time.
laeborari - library [borrowed].
laeditse - has sent a message by someone.
laêla - direct; give orders; give a charge; bend a bow and fix the string; load and cock a gun; bid goodbye; warn one's host of one's intention to leave. laêlana DIAL. vaR oF Jaalana, bid one another goodbye; exhort one another.
laêlanye - êlana, have instructed or exhorted one another.
laêlêla - êla, instruct or exhort one another; cock a gun for.
laeletsa - has instructed or have exhorted one another.
laetsa - send a message by; give a message.
lagalêla - carry with both hands; hold up with the hands.
lagaletse - has carried with both hands.
lai - 1D. exer, of flashing, as lightning.
laidisa - cause or help to lick up or to destroy utterly, as a fire.
laidisitse - has caused to lick up or to destroy utterly.
laidisiwa - being caused to lick up or to destroy utterly.
laila - (same as "Jaitsa"), lick up at once something laid on the palm of the hand; sweep off, as a war, destructive fire etc.; devour or completely destroy.
laile - has charged; has directed, or exhorted.
laitsa - (same as "laila"), lick up at once, etc.
lakaila - similar to laila, destroy, or ravage, as by a fire; lick greedily and quickly.
lakaitse - has destroyed, or ravaged, as by a fire etc.
lakaitswe - has been destroyed, or completely removed.
lakasêla - sparkle; shine brightly.
lakasetse - has sparkled; has shone brightly.
lala - lie down; spend the night; lodge.
laleditse - has invited; has invited to a feast.
laleditswe - has been invited; has been invited to a feast.
laleêga - (same as "/ealeêga"), run about hither and thither.
laleegile - (same as "/ealeegile"), has run about hither and thither.
lalêla - sup; take the evening meal; lie in wait for; ambush; seek to catch in speech; tempt by leading on to an unsuspected trap; lie at the catch; watch; guard; sleep near to.
laleleditse - has invited to a feast; has hired for.
lalêlwa - be tempted.
laletsa - hire; call for any purpose; offer or give anything without being asked for it; invite to a feast.
laletswa - being invited, same as /alediwa.
laloga - wander away from; become estranged.
lalogile - has wandered away from; has become estranged.
lalola - do a thing very well, or perfectly.
lalotsê - has done a thing very well, or perfectly.
lamadiwa - (same as "lamatswa and lemadiwa"), being spoiled by gifts and thus being led to expect them.
lamala - be accustomed; become accustomed to receive; form a habit. prov., go lamala ga namane ke go robala le mmaayo.
lamalêla - be accustomed to.
lamatsa - cause a person to expect something on further occasion by giving it once or twice.
lametse - (same as "lemala and lemetse"), has become accustomed; has formed a habit.:.
lampi - a lamp; a lantern [borrowed].
laodisa - appoint a ruler; help to tule; give authority over; ordain; get a traditional doctor to determine, by casting bones, what the matter is with something.
laodisitse - has appointed a ruler; has given authority to set over; has caused to be divined by magic what the matter is.
laodisiwa - being appointed a ruler; being given authority to set over.
laola - command; govern; determine or resolve; divine by magic.
laolaka - command much; govern in an overbearing manner; dominate.
laolana - command, or govern one another; have power over one another.
laolêga - be submitted to the law.
laolêla - permit to.
laolêla - has annulled unloaded, etc., for.
laolêsêga - become subject to law; be governable.
laoletse - has appointed to; has permitted to.
laoletswe - has been permitted or appointed to.
laolola - annul a law or command; render a command of no-effect; uncock a trigger; uncock a gun; unload a vehicle.
laolwa - be governed; be controlled or regulated.
laotsê - has commanded; has appointed; has given an order.
laotswê - has been commanded controlled, etc.
lapa - become tired or weary; become weary or faint.
lapaka - tire much or easily.
lapêla - tire for.
lapele - /e-, soprano.
lapile - has tired; has exhausted; has become weary.
lapisa - has tired out; cause to tire; cause to be weary.
lapisitse - has caused to be tired.
lapisiwa - being made tired or weary.
lapiwa - being tired.
lapologa - become rested.
lapologêla - become rested for.
lapologile - be rested or refreshed; has rested.
lapolola - untie a difficult or intricate knot; solve a riddle; cause or make viscous.
lapolola - refresh; give assistance.
lapolosa - cause to rest or refresh.
lapolositse - has caused to rest.
lata - visit; follow; trace, as an individual who is lost.
latalana - follow one another.
latalanye - have followed one another.
latana - find one another; go to one another.
latêla - follow; go for.
latêlana - (same as "latalana"), but the latter is more commonly used.
latêlêla - êla, trace carefully; follow the spoor of; pursue; go doggedly after.
latetse - has followed.
latile - has visited; has gone to; has followed; has gone to find and bring along.
latisa - help to trace; track a thing; take a thing to someone.
latisitse - has followed after; has helped to trace; has helped to track after.
latisiwa - being helped to follow; being helped to trace; has helped to track after.
latitšhutu - n., ¥hutu latitude [borrowed].
latiwa - being followed.
latlha - throw away without any particular aim; misplace; sell at cost or at a loss; bury a corpse; let livestock Stray.
latlhaka - cast away much; misplace many things, etc.
latlhana - stray from each other; lead each other astray.
latlhêga - be lost.
latlhêgêla - êga, become cast away for; be lost for.
latlhêgêlwa - lose.
latlhegetswe - has been lost to; has had a loss.
latlhêgêtswe - is cast away for, i.e. to the detriment of.
latlhegile - cast away; lost; has become cast away.
latlhile - has cast away; has misplaced etc.
latlhisa - cause to cast away; misplace or bury a corpse; cause someone to break a habit, as of smoking, drinking, etc.
latlhisitse - has caused to cast away; has caused one to misplace or lose something.
latlhisiwa - being made to cast away; being made to break a (bad) habit.
latofaditse - has accused of a fault; has made to appear guilty.
latofadiwa - being accused of a fault; being made to appear guilty.
latofatsa - accuse of a fault; make to appear guilty. Jatofolola v.s. REV., give a person blame; prove one to be in the wrong [Dj.
latofolotsê - has given a person blame. Jatola v.s.simp., deny; deny a fault; deny goodness in oneself or another; give a negative answer; announce a death; make an obituary.
latolêga - be deniable; be terminally ill.
latolêla - to announce a death to; deny the existence of anything to.
latolêlana - deny to each other; deny the existence of anything to one another.
latolêsêga - be deniable; be denied.
latoletse - has denied to another; has announced the death to.
latotsê - has denied; has announced the death of.
latsa - lay a person or animal down; cause to lie down.
latswa - lick.
latswaka - lick much; lick extensively.
latswêga - be lickable; become lickable.
latswegile - has been licked.
latswitse - has licked.
laya - instruct; direct; charge; exhort; lay down the law.
le gona cCONJ - PHR, SO; also; in like manner; moreover.
lea - tie a knot carelessly; sew slackly.
leabêga - be wanton.
leadimê - dikadimê and maadimê, a borrowed or lent thing.
leafaditse - has made empty.
leafala - become empty.
leafetse - has made empty.
leaka - siInc.oF maaka, maaka is commonly used; a lie; a vulture with white beak.
lealea - run or move about, in search of something, as a calf its mother, or a thirsty animal water.
lealeditse - has taken beyond measure, or without measuring; has taken in large quantities.
lealeila - has run about looking for someone. —.
lealetsa - take beyond measure, or without measuring; take in large quantities.
leana - become convalescent; be able to go about after severe sickness; convalesce; recuperate.
leanê - a device; a plan; a scheme.
leanye - has become convalesced; has recovered from severe sickness.
leaparapelo - and pelo, heart; the pericardium.
leatIhamana - used mainly as a REL. s, be foolish; be childish; be stupid.
leatlhamanye - has become foolish, childish, or stupid.
leats6 - sinc.or dikatsdê, a gift; alms. Kats6 is more commonly used.
leba - similar to bêna, look; look at; regard with attention.
lebadi - numeral; enumerative.
lebadi - scar.
lebaditse - has caused to forget.
lebagana - be over against; face each other.
lebaganngwa - being put opposite to each other.
lebaganya - put opposite to each other.
lebaganye - be positioned directly opposite to each other; have faced each other.
lebaka - sinc.or mabaka, bakery.
lebaka - look much; look all over, etc.
lebala - similar to lebowa, earing; open place; a plain.
lebalana - fail to recognise each other.
lebaleba - look about; look at continually; have oversight of; look from one to another.
lebalebêla - look over for another; choose for.
lebalêga - capable of being forgotten; be forgotten.
lebalegêla - capable of being forgotten for; be forgotten for.
lebalegile - is forgotten; is closed, as a matter.
lebalêl6 - a binding under the thatch of a house.
lebana - gaze at each other; be worthy.
lebanngwa - being caused to look at each other.
lebantsê - have caused to look at each other; has caused to look at one another.
lebantsha - cause to look at each other.
lebantshitse - has caused to look at each other.
lebanya - examine a thing closely.
lebati - door.
lebatla - /e-, sinc.or mabatla, an open space; a public assembly; a gathering of people at the kgotla.
lebatsa - cause to forget; cause to forget something so as to take possession of it.
lebea - same as lophegê, a large piece of a broken platter, still of some use.
lebeana - /e-, mabeana or dipeana pio. oF lebea, which is less commonly used. Same as lophegwana, a potsherd; a piece of broken earthenware, commonly used for putting burning coals in.
lebebe - sinc.or mabebe, cream of milk.
lebeditse - has cast evil eyes on.
lebêga - lookable; preferable; be preferred.
lebegile - has been preferred; is/was preferable.
lebêjana - wasting; leanness; apex beat.
lebêkêbêkê - starvation.
lebêk6 - a nose eaner; contempt.
lebêla - guard for; have oversight.
lebêlê - (same as "letsêlê a human or animal breast").
lebêlê - sorghum.
lebêlêbêlê - millet.
lebêlêla - êla, look at for; expect; wait for.
lebêlêtê - mabêlêtê, a wanton; a prostitute [borrowed].
lebeletse - has looked for; has expected etc.; has watched over.
lebelê - speed; rapid pace; a race.
lebêlwa - being watched for.
lebentlêlêboithekisetso - supermarket.
lebese - milk; fresh milk.
lebêtê - /e-, mabêtê, spleen.
lebetsa - cast evil eyes on; wink at.
lebetse - has forgotten.
lebile - has looked; has looked at.
lebisa - make to look; make to face ina certain direction; help someone to examine something.
lebisisa - look at intently or carefully; scrutinise.
lebisisitse - has looked at carefully; has scrutinised.
lebisitse - has caused or made to look at; has laid a charge against.
lebisiwa - being made to look.
lebitla - (same as "hu"), a grave.
lebits6 - a name; a nomenclature, leina is more widely used. lebiwa_v.s. pass, same as lejwa, being looked at.
leboa - sinc.or maboa, a plain.
leboa - fur; animal hair.
lebodi - a rat living on or near a river's bank; greater canerat.
lebodu - a species of flat snake; a rat; a chameleon; a dewiap. Lelobu or leobu are synonyms of lebodu, chameleon.
lebogaka - thank profusely.
lebogêla - give thanks for.
lebogetse - has thanked for; has become thankful for.
lebogile - has given thanks; has thanked.
lebogisa - cause to thank; make thankful for.
lebogisitse - has caused or helped to thank.
lebogisiwa - being caused to thank.
lebogiwa - (same as "lebogwa"), being thanked.
lebogo - Jebogologolo, never; not a bit of it.
lebogê - /e-, suffering; agony.
lebôg6 - (same as "letsôg6"), an arm, from the wrist to the shoulder; a shoulder of meat.
lebôk6 - praise; a praise poem.
lebole - fist. Same as letswele, kindness; generosity; magnanimity; compassion.
lebdlêla - a bee or wasp sting.
lebolobolo - a puff adder.
lebônê - /e-, a lamp; a light; a lantern.
lebone - /e-, a troop of gnus or wildebeest. Jebênêphuruphuts6 N.c.s le-, searchlight. Jebosêga v.s.NEUT., be received with thanks; acceptable; be acceptable.
lebêta - a wall.
lebdte - siING.or mabdête, same as letsadi a bruise; blood blister in the flesh. Jebêtla n.s /e-, a calf that is a few weeks old. Jebotlana N.s /e-, young calf. Jebêtl616 N.s le-, (ror), bottle.
lebotsane - /e-, a collection of goats or kids.
lebotswana - the top of the shin bone.
lebowa - a bare treeless plain, or open treeless place.
lebowa - a species of edible fungus or mushroom.
lebowane - species of feathery grass.
lebu - /e-, salty soil; salt lick.
lebududu - /e-, dry, hard ground.
lebusa - vaginal discharge; lecorrhoea; gonorrohoea.
lebutha - a large kaross; a bush with yellow flowers.
lebutswapele - mabutswapele ripen, and pele, first, first fruit; the first ripe fruit.
ledi - siING.oF madi, a small denomination of money; a coin; a drop of blood.
lediana - a hindrance.
lediba - a deep hole in a stream; a pool in a river bed.
ledibêla - a hole or dam into which water is poured; a hole in the ground from which animals drink; a drinking trough; a stern.
ledibogê - (same as "letsibogê"), a drift, or ford of a river.
ledile - has cried; has wept.
ledimo - similar to sitsuatsue, a strong rushing wind; a hurricane; a storm.
lediri - a verb.
ledirwa - ect in a sentence; also known as sedirwa.
ledisa - cause to weep.
ledisitse - has caused to weep.
ledisiwa - being caused to weep.
leditse - has caused to cry; has Tung a bell; has telephoned.
lediwa - being cried; being rung; being telephoned.
ledu - a hollow or indentation in a rock; a natural stern.
ledubu - /e-, a collection of willows.
ledumedi - a young lion.
ledutêla - a pond or pool in the veld; a waterhole in the veld.
lee - an egg.
leeba - a rock pigeon the distinction with lephoi is pedantic.
leebana - a sudden gushing shower; a handsome amount; a good number.
leebarope - and marope, ruins; a pigeon. leele apjs.s., same as felele, tall; long.
leemedi - pronoun.
leêpa - call together; summons.
leêpatsela - sinc.or maêpatsela, similar to lesilo, a wilfully foolish person; a fool.
leêtsane - (same as "loêtsane"), a species of medicinal plant.
lefa - pay; expiate.
lefafalele - sefafalele is more commonly used, a vain person.
lefaka s - pay much or often.
lefaka s - crooked; hooked.
lefaratlhatlha - mafaratlhatlha confusion; a confused state of affairs; a state of confusion, maharatlhatlha is more commonly used; a miscellaneous group of things; a great variety of things, all in the same place.
lefarelane - sinc.or mafarelane, merino sheep.
lefatlha - baldness.
lefatlha - (same as "lewêlana"), one of twins.
lefatlha - the breast; the chest; the upper part of the body; thorax.
lefatshe - siING.or mafatshe, a country; a land; a state; the earth; the world.
lefaufau - mafaufau atmosphere; space; outer space.
lefeditse - has rendered to, or for, has requited.
lefêêl6 - broom.
lefêla - a thing of nought, hence in vain.
lefêla - atone for.
lefêle - a cockroach.
lefêlêpa - (same as "leferesoko and leferefere"), a cheat; a rogue.
lefêlêpê - s. REL., childish.
leferefere - siING. oF maferefere, a cheat; a fraud; a deceiver; an unprincipled person; a juggler.
leferetsoko - an unprincipled person; a cheat; a rogue.?.
lefetetsa - transitive.
lefêtlhê - the flower of the mealie; the soap bush; long wooden instrument with spikes that is used to mix meal with boiling water; a pronged stick for stirring food.
lefetsa - recompense; repay; requite.
lefetwa - one passed by; an old maid.
lefifi - darkness.
lefika - a rock; a massive stone.
lefikgwa - oudy and very cold weather.
lefile - has paid; has expiated.
lefisa - a loan cow.
lefisa - cause or help to pay or make good; cause or make to pay.
lefisitse - has caused or helped or made to pay.
lefisiwa - being caused or made to pay.
lefiswana - little pot. lefiwa_v.s. pass, being paid.
lefofora - a crumb; a remnant (used only of solids); a little that remains.
lefoko - a word. prov. lefoko ga le bowe, go bowa monwana and lefoko la kgosi le agêlwa mosakê.
leforelane - merino sheep.
lefôrwana - similar to seruwa, a chicken in a bad egg.
lefothênêntê - lieutenant [borrowed].
lefotlha - naked.
lefotlh6 - a leaf, or any other unwanted material stripped off a tree or branch.
lefufa - jealousy; jealousy between the wives of one man.
lefufu - a bird of the pheasant species.
lefuka - a pinion; a wing; a feather.
lefukubu - (same as "legakabe"), a raven; a black crow.
lefulê - foam; froth scum on water.
legabea - love medicine; a species of herb.
legadima - magadima lightning.
legae - a home; a dwelling place.
legaetlhagê - habitat; natural home.
legaga - a cave.
legago - a rut; a furrow; a torn piece.
legakabe - a crow; a white-necked crow or pied crow; legakabe le lefatswa; a black crow, legakabe le ientsho, also known as lehukubu.
legakgala - the very early dawn; the first streak of light; a caterpillar with shiny silvery dots along the body and which feeds on mosu or umbrella thorn and on mogênênê or Terminalia sericea.
legakwa - a flint; a crystal; a piece of quartz.
legala - a coal; a live coal; a burning coal; meal prepared from fresh milk and mabêlê or maize flour.
legalaopa - /e-, similar to lebala, a flat bare land; earing in a forest without trees.
legalapa - /e-, the palate; the roof of the mouth. Generally used in the plural. 1p. Expr, go itaya legalapa, to snore. le galê con. pL, of course; just so; however.
legale - chisel, ete.
legalegile - has gone about begging.
legalê - a bitter cry.
leganê - the mouth; the inside of the mouth.
legapa - a shell, as of a tortoise, commonly shortened to kgapa.
legapu - a watermelon.
legare - a razor blade.
legare - peel of melon fruit.
legare - the centre; the middle.
legata - a skull. Jegatlapa N.-s /e-, a coward; a deserter from a regiment; a skulker in battle. Jegelêga v.s.simp., go about begging; be greedy. Jegelegele N.s Je-, magelegele, unripe fruit; lekgela is more frequently used. Jêgêlêla v.s.sIMp., hold up, on the hands; carrying anything on both hands, placed side by side so as to receive something; bear up with both hands. Jegeletse v.s. PFT. < lêgêlêla, has held up, on the hands; has carried anything on both hands; has stretched out both hands to receive something.
legetla - siING. oF magetla, shoulder; shoulder blade.
legodi - glossy starling.
legodimo - heaven; the sky.
legodu - cooked melon and beans.
legofi - applause; palm of hand; handful. Jegdgd N.s le-, crust; the charred food found at the bottom of a pot; a grass mat; scab.
legoka - PHR, never; not a bit of it.
legola - a reaped garden; a garden that has given no harvest, but has pasture for cattle.
legolo - s le-, big; large; huge.
legonnyane - a small bush, useful for the treatment of cuts and burns; a species of snake.
legope - commonly called legopê, the shoulder blade.
legopêl6 - a beef steak; a piece of meat that is traditionally given to someone who has helped to skin a cow.
legopê - dikgop6, magopê; a rib.
legora ' - siING. oF magora, fence; stockade.
legorwe - (same as "legwere"), highly poisonous tree snake; a boomslang.
legotlhe - universe.
legôtlh6 - a large field rat.
legotIho - a scar on wood.
legoto - similar to lekgela, an unmarried female; a virgin.
legotutua - a species of large, brightly coloured locust.
legou - a species of wild goose.
legwafa - armpit; axilla. legwafa la morago Nom.PL, groin.
legwagwa - hair on the cheek; a hair; a whisker.
legwajana - an ankle; a wrist.
legwale - a pheasant.
legwarane - a stone, tooth, etc., for rubbing skins.
legwaripa - siING.OF magwaripa, a cheat.
legwatata - (same as "lekgêrê"), drought.
legwêgwê - impatience; an impatient person, used.
legwêka - (same as "legakwa which is more commonly used"), a flint; a crystal; a piece of quartz.
legwele - the pI. FORM., legwejana, is more commonly used, ankle.
legweletlha s - very crooked; much twisted; gnarled; that which is not right.
legwere - (same as "logwere"), a small green, very poisonous snake; boomslang; a calf that is a year or two old and suitable to be weaned.
legweregwere - a trembling, as a voice.
legwete - sinc.or mafatla, baldness; state of being hairless.
legwetla - autumn.
lehalahala - hall.
lehatwana - /e-, a species of snake.
lehele - sinc.or mahele, commonly called mhele, a wild goat; a rare buck.
lehetla - sinc.or mahetla, a poisonous medicine.
lehihiri - cartilage.
lehinini - (same as "lerinini"), a gum; the place in a gum where a tooth is missing.
lehohoho s - absolutely bare and empty.
lehuba - /e-, sinc.or mahuba, inflammation of the lung; pulmonary tuberculosis.
lehubala - sinc.or mahubala, same as lehupu, a tuber that bears one to three golfball-like tubers that are edible; wild potato.
lehukubu - (same as "legakabe"), a crow; a black crow.
lehukutsa - a species of large coloured pigeon.
lehuma - /e-, poverty; great sorrow; damage; loss. 1D. EXPR, go itshwara lehuma, to rest the head on the palm of the hand as a sign of great sorrow; it is ill-mannered, go itshwara lehuma.
lehumê6 - /e-, siNc.or mahumêd, a place for sucking up water.
lehunêlê - (same as "lefut6"), a knot.
lehupêla - /e-, a flower bud.
lehupu - (same as "lehupula or lehupala"), a swelling caused by a blow; a prominence made by things hidden under a kaross, etc.; a species of large edible fungus or wild potato.
lehura - /e-, a piece of fat.
lehutapatane - sinc.or mahutapatane an undersized and despised person.
lehuti - /e-, a hole or hollow, in the ground; a pit; also used in some dialects to mean a grave.
lehutihuti - s le- [p).a very large number.
lehut6 - a knot ina string; a knob on a stick.
lehututu - /e-, mahututu, ground hornbill.
leijadi - ver.r. ijala, a shoot springing from the previous year's sowing.
leile - has knotted carelessly.
leilwe - has been carelessly knotted, or slackly sewn.
leina - a name; grammatical term for noun.
leinane - a story; a folktale; a fable.
leind - in peripheral dialects, a tooth.
leiê - /e-, same as lekakauvê a crab; a crabfish.
leipei - a free and independent person.
leisa - cause to be knotted badly.
leisê - a cooking place; an oven; a grate.
leisêtshipi - stove.
leiswana - hot plate.
leitihapêl6 - maitlhapêlê riotous mirth.
leitlhê - matlhê or maitlhd, an eye; the is rarely used.
leitlhwana - sinc.or maitlhwana, vim. oF /eitihd, an eyelet; temple (of the head). leiwa_v.s. pass, being slackly sewn, or carelessly knotted (of thread).
lejak6 - a sojourn; a temporary stay in some place so as to offer services and be rewarded in cash or in kind.
lejê - (same as "majwê"), a stone; a hill, etc.
lejêleputswa - gold reef.:.
lejêl6 - sinc.or majêld, a spring hare' hole.
lejwa - sinc.or majwa, found in the expression go ya lejwa, a sojourn that has exceeded the limits of being temporary.
lejwa - No pL,same as lojwa, go astray permanently, such as livestock, as in 80 ya lejwa.
lejwa - (same as "lebiwa"), being looked at; being seen.
leka - a sore made by carrying a burden.
leka - attempt; test; put to the Proof hence tempt. Iekaba N.cL.s /e-, sinc.or makaba, a pack-ox.
lekabakaba - sinc.or makabakaba dissension; uproar.
lekadiba - a deep hole in a stream; a pool in a riverbed; a Pool.
lekaka - a big flying ant; a straw ant.
lekakaba - sinc.or makakaba, a leaf.
lekakauwe - sinc.or makakauwe, a crab.
lekala - sinc.or makala, department Lekalaka n.cv.s le-, sinc.or Makalaka, an individual of the Kalanga tribe, respectfully referred to as Mokalaka.
lekalekana - be equal; be equal-sided; be even.
lekalekane - be square, or equal-sided.
lekalekantsê - has made square.
lekalekanya - make square, or equalsided; make even.
lekalekanye - equal or evensided.
lekamphane - a bow.
lekana - try or test each other; tempt each other.
lekana - be of same size; be enough for; be worthy; be able to do a work; be equal to a demand made upon one.
lekanêla - try or test one another for; mutual trial of strength for.
lekanêla - be of a desired strength, height, weight, etc.; be sufficient for.
lekanetse - have tried one another.
lekanngwa - being measured; being made equal.
lekata - heirloom. Jekatane N.a melon that is not of the sweet species; musk melon.
lekatla - an uncircumcised person; an uninitiated youth. Jekau N./e-, a youth; a young man; an animal's womb.
lekaudi - a lock of hair; a straggling lock of hair.
lekawa - a wild cucumber.
lekawa - a raft made of reeds, etc., commonly found in the Okavango delta.
lekedi - a seedbed; a plant nursery.
lekeišene - location [borrowed].
lekêla - try for; attempt to.
lekeleditse - has tested the depth of, etc.
lekelêla - test the depth of; fathom; sound the depth; taste; try out.
lekeletsa - try or taste; fathom or sound the depth.
lekese - a trunk; a coffin [borrowed].
lêkêsêla - 0 up and down.
lekete - a weight; a pit dug in the ground for a grave or a game trap.
leketla - (same as "lophêgd"), a chip of anything; a bit of anything broken off. leketla_v.s. stup, be loose or shake, as a pole or a disjointed limb.
leketlo - (same as "leketla"),; a chip of anything; a bit of anything broken off.
lekgaba - sinc.or makgaba, a hill; a gravel stone; a very light thing, as a piece of empty honeycomb.
lekgabe - sinc.or makgabe, a fringe of strings hanging in the fronts of girls and women to cover nakedness.
lekgabetla - sinc.or makgabetla, thin slices of meat; small pieces of wood.
lekgabi - half an edible bulb, split in digging.
lekgadi - an individual of the Manthatise an.
lekgadikgadi - a big, wide saltpan.
lekgantsêtsê - an egg or nit of a flea or louse.
lekgaolatshega - probably the ornate sandveld or the spotted sandveld lizard.
lekgap6 - sinc.or makgapê, smeared pattern of cow dung on the floor or wall.
lekgarebê - a virgin; an unmarried lady or recently married young women.
lekgasa - sinc.or makgasa, a strip of a tattered garment; a tattered garment; a member of one of the tribal regiments.
lekgathi - sinc.or makgathi, a drove; a group; a ump; a parcel of things; a division; a part.
lekgatlakgatla - a hasty one. pRov., lekgatlakgatla le jele difokotswana, modikologa o jele pholo ya tona.
lekgela - (same as "legotê an unmarried female"),; a virgin intacta; an unripe fruit, same as lekgele, which is hardly ever used.
lekgelebe - a bank or dam for holding a small quantity of water.
lekgêtho - sinc.or makgêthd, a tax; a tribute.
lekgethu - sinc.or makgethu, a sharp cutting stone; a flint.
lekgetla - droop, as the ears of a tired horse.
lekgetIha - a shell.
lekgetlile - has drooped, as the ears of a tired horse. Lekgoa n.cxs le-, sinc. or Makgoa, an European; an Englishman, also called Lenyesimana or Leesimane. —.
lekgôba - a slave; a member of a slave family.
lekgola - an uninitiated person of either sex; one of the uncircumcised. Used as a term of contempt.
lekgolo - a hundred.
lekgomane - /e-, a gourd, when still fresh and tender; dry gourds are used for making calabashes.
lekgotla - a council; an association; a movement or organisation.
lekgwafo - a lung.
lekgwakgwa - (same as "lentshwatshwa"), a cartilage of a nose.
lekgwape - (same as "motshwêêtshwêê scabies").
lekgwarapana - gravel. Iekhafa Nn. s le-, makhafa, a very light thing, as a piece of empty honeycomb. Lekhalate N.s le-, sinc.or Makhalate,a coloured; a person of mixed blood in Southern Africa [borrowed].
lekhonkhobê - a hireling; a contemptible hireling during colonial times.
lekhubu - /e-, sinc.or makhubu, a wave; a ridge; a low hill.
lekhue - /e-, sinc.or makhue, same as seruwa, an egg dropped outside the nest; an egg left in the nest after the rest are hatched, hence a bad egg.
lekhukhuthe - makhukhuthe sacrum.
lekhurane - rash.
lekinetana - a deserter from a working party; a cheat.
lekitlanê - a join; a joint.
lekobo - a wild animal resembling a tiger.
lekodisa - give information about; report the state of a sick person.
lekodisitse - has given information about; has reported the state of a sick person.
lekodisiwa - being given information about.
lekôk6 - a group of people; a ique; a band of people; a sect; an order.
lekêkôma - sinc.or makêkêma, a side burden on a pack-ox; the impedimenta of a traveller carried on his back; the rough points and swellings on smooth surfaces; impediments on what would otherwise be a fine, smooth blisterless piece of wood.
lekola - visit; call to enquire after health of a sick person; call to check on thê state of affairs.
lekolaka - visit frequently; call often or at many points to enquire after the health of g sick person.
lekolana - etc.
lekolêga - be visitable; be capable of informing enquirers about one's state of health.
lekolêla - visit for; visit the sick for.
lekoletse - has visited for; has called to enquire after.
lekolo - similar to garawe, a sand shovel.
lekôlêlwane - the white-billed stork; a large white locust bird.
lekolonkwane - a species of small elephant.
lekolwane - sinc.or makolwane, a young man in his prime; a sturdy strong man; a man just on the verge of manhood.
lekoma - (same as "lebota"), a mud or brick wall.
lekontšha - sinc.or makontsha, a big single elephant.
lekopanyi - makopanyi conjunction.
lekop6 - a type of pimple or pustule.
lekoro - roundshouldered person.
lekorotlo - sinc.or makorotlo, same as lekoro, round-shouldered person.
lekorotlwane - /e-, same as lekoro and lekorotlo, round-shouldered person.
lekôtê - sinc.or makêtê, same as lekwêtê, a species of large mouse or rat living among stones; a lump of earth turned up by the spade or plough, etc.
lekotsê - has called to enquire after the health of a sick person, etc.
lekotwana - /e-, sinc.or makotwana and maotwana, a small wheel; one of the rcle of poles on which a roof rests.
lekudula - /e-, sinc.or makudula, female tick.
lekuka - /e-, a skin sack; a milk sack, made of skin (nowadays it may be made out of other materials). n.B.it is used for processing fresh milk into sour milk or madila.
lekukunopu - /e-, a ridge or swelling.
lekumêôkum6 - makumêkumd a fatted young animal.
lekwelekwele - sinc.or makwelekwele, a barrow or a long mound. Jekwêtê N.s le-, same as lekdtê, a lump of ay.
lekwetekwio - a quail; a Namaqua partridge.
lela - cry; weep; wail; be very hot, as the sun.
leladitse - has caused to look up.
lelafala - become very hot.
lelafatsa - heat; raise the temperature.
lelafetse - has become very hot.
lelala - look upwards; lean back, so as to look up.
lelalêla - look up to.
lelaletsa - cause to look up to.
lelaletse - has looked up to.
lelana - /e-, sinc.or malana, appendix.
lelanyana - appendix.
lelapa - /e-, same as lelwapa, a low wall or enclosure in a home; a home; a family.
lelata - a servant maid; a woman servant; nowadays it could mean a male or female servant.
lelatlha - coal; battery.
lelatsa - cause to look up.
lele - 4TH POS, same as jele, that yonder; lekwal6 lele, that letter yonder.
leleanngwa - being gathered into a dense aggregation of objects.
leleantsê - become gathered into a dense aggregation.
leleanya - gather into a dense aggregation of objects.
leleanye - be in a dense and unsightly mass.
leleditse - has made melody for; has telephoned.
leledu - (same as "loledu a tuft of hair on maize cobs").
lelefala - become long.
lelefatsa - make long; lengthen.
lelefatsa - make long.
lelefu - /e-, a tonsil; an uvula.
lêlêka - drive away; chase; pursue so as to turn and bring back.
lêlêkaka - pursue far and wide.
lêlêkana - chase each other; pursue one another.
lêlêkêga - be chased; be pursued.
lelekeja - s Je-, same as lekgasa, legago and letanta, a piece of rag.
lêlêkêla_ - chase for, or to.
lelekile - has chased; has pursued; has given chase; has driven away.
lelekisa - help to pursue.
lelekisitse - has caused to chase; has helped to chase.
lelekisiwa - being helped or caused to chase.
lelekiwa - êlêkwa, being chased; be chased.
lelêla - Weep, cry, or wail for. lelelele int. < /eele, very long.
lêlêlêlê - 1p. Expr, descriptive of the crawling gliding or slithering of a snake or any long thing that seems to move effortlessly.
leleme - tongue.
lêlêmêla - creep; crawl or glide, as a snake in the grass; make one's way gradually along an unknown path; creep stealthily in the grass, as a person with an evil purpose.
lelemetse - has crept, as a snake in the grass.
lelengwana - /e-, epiglottis; vulva; itoris.
lelentse - has clamoured; has talked very loudly.
lelenya - amour; talk very loudly; wet the tongue by moving it about in the mouth.
lelepa - a difficult or intricate knot; a puzzle; a riddle; a mystery.
lêlêpê - the border of ploughed land.
lêlêsêla_ - Sneak through grass.
leletsa - make melody for; cause to cry; telephone.
leloba - cotton wool; a flower; a species of tree; flax; linen; twine.
lelobu - /e-, sinc.or malobu or maobu same as Jeobu, a chameleon.
lelodi - (same as "todi string bark"),. im.
lelokololê - a joint of a finger, wrist or ankle.
lelêpê - a person who curries favour by telling lies.
lelota - solder; wax for sealing holes on vessels, containers or surfaces.
lelwala - /e-, a grinding stone; a corn mill; a mill stone.
lelwapa - /e-, same as lelapa, the low wall or enclosure in a home; a family; a home; a household.
lêma - cause to form a habit; spoil a child; to be shaped in a particular manner, as an animal's horns.
lema - turn over the ground, as when preparing to sow; dig. -.
lêmaditse - has caused to be spoiled; has made a thing to get into the habit of.
lêmala - similar to golafala, be spoiled, as when made to be accustomed to certain ways of behaving; be in the habit of; form a habit; cultivate a habit.
lemaê - needle; injection.
lematla - /e-, sinc.or mamatla, grapple plant; Harpagophytum.
lêmatsa - cause to be spoiled; cause to cultivate, or form a habit.
lemêga - be tillable; be ploughable; be arriving in parties, as men at a meeting.
lemegile - was ploughable; became tilled. lêmêla_v.s. appL., cause to form a bad habit for; shape up in a particular way, as the horns of an animal.
lemena - a pit with spikes at the bottom; a game trap.
lemênêmênê - mamênêmênê imposter; quack; dishonest person.
lemeseditse - has caused to gush out. lemesetsa_v.s.simp., cause to gush out.
lemetsaphala - sinc.or mametsaphala (DJ, a species of large serpent.
lemetse - has become spoiled; has become accustomed to certain ways of behaving; has ploughed for.
lemi - (same as "manyê the fibrous part of a pumpkin"), melon, ete.
lemile - has caused a habit to be formeg: has caused a thing to forma habit; haye " pointed or shaped horns.
lemile - has ploughed or tilled.
lemipi - sinc.or mamipi, fat round gut; omentum.:.
lemisa - cause to form a habit; help to point in a certain way, as the horns of an animal.
lemisitse - has helped or caused to plough.
lemme - /e-, NOPL, < mme, take, as small portion; a small quantity.
lemofaditse - has caused to become good.
lemofala - become good; be profitable.
lemofalêla - be profitable for, or to.
lemofaletse - was profitable for, or to.
lemofatsa - cause to become good.
lemofetse - has become good.
lemoga - observe; perceive; know; discover.
lemogêla - observe for; perceive for; become astute at.
lemogetse - has observed for; has perceived for.
lemogile - has observed; has perceived.
lemolola - break a bad habit in an individual; restore to correct ways.
lemolola - replough a patch.
lemolola - undo the shape of an animal's horns.
lemosêga - become evident, or noticeable.
lemosegile - has become evident, or noticeable.
lemotsha - make evident; cause to become aware of.
lemotshitse - has made evident; has caused to become aware of.
lemphêtlhê - /e-, sinc.or mamphêtlhê, a rascal; a rogue or scamp.
lemphoro - the is more frequently used, a young bird.
lemphorwana - vim. oF lemphoro, a young bird; a nestling.
lemponyemponye - /e-, | mamponyeponye, same as omponyemponye, a dwarf; a pigmy.
lempu - a salt lick.
lenala - sinc.or manala, nail. Jenane N.list; programme; agenda. Jenanetema N.s le-, agenda.: -~ Jenanethêk6 N.c1.s /e-, invoice. Jenanetlhalosê N.glossary. Jeneko N.wing ofa surrounding army.; Jeng ADV. OFT. AND INTER, when; o tsile leng, when did you come? Jenga N./e-, crack in skin or on sole of foot; chilblain. 1p. ExPR, go kgwa lenga, to utter an expletive.
lengakare - the grapple plant. Jengamu N.s le-, rear lower part of belly, above udder. Jengana N./e-, COLL.a collection of hook thorn; Acacia mellifera trees or bushes.
lengana - /e-, area behind ear; mastoid bone or reed flute. ww. EXPR, selo se mangana, sika loo phagê. Jengau N./e-, same as nkwê, a leopard.
lengodu - (same as "lekudula"), likely to be a female blue tick. Jengôlê n.s le-, sinc.or mangêlê, a knee; a front leg knee of an animal.
lengongobadi - /e-, a silent person.
lengongobi - a morose or sullen person; a thief.
lengdpê - /Je-, siNG.or mangêpê, a iff; a ditch; a donga.
lengope - (same as "lekope"), a lump of porridge when badly stirred.
lengwaêl6 - siNc.or mangwaêld, a stone; a tooth, etc. used for rubbing skins.
lengwe QUANT. QUAL.S - a certain one.
lengxa - /e-, an expletive word pronounced as written, the x representing the lateral ick sound.
leni - linen [borrowed].
lenoleumo - sinc.or dilenoleumo, linoleum [borrowed].
lenong - a vulture; a black vulture.
lenono - sinc.or manono, the first internode or topmost internode of a sweet a or corn Stalk, used in making the bojale ress.
lenêt6 - siINc.oF mandtê, a stray locust or a lot of stray locusts, birds, etc.; a locust or a lot of locusts left behind by the swarm; the leg of a locust.
lênsê - lens [borrowed].
lentaatshwene - a valiant man; one who has slain a man in battle; one who has killed a ravenous beast; a feast in honour of a victor in battle or over a ravenous beast.
lentsêtsê - (same as "letsêtsê"), a nit or egg of a louse or flea. Commonly called lekgantsêtsê.
lentshorwana - vIM. OF lentshoro, a nestling; a young bird. Commonly known as lemphorwana.
lentshwatshwa - bones of the nose.
lentshwêkga - /e-, sinc.or mantshwêkga the sound made by snapping fingers while pounding corn.
lentswe - a voice; a word; the sound of a voice; the sound of any spoken thing.
lentswê - stone; rock.
lentswêtshipi - NOPL. stone, and tshipi, iron; adamant; copper.
lenya - an angle; a scallop cut out in a kaross; an ornamental design of angles, etc. on a wall.
lenyalê - /e-, sinc.or manyald, a wedding; a marriage.
lenyaphiri - a block of limestone with holes in it. excrete, and phiri, wolf.
lenyebi - /e-, siINc.oF manyebi, an otter. Used also as an equivalent of seal.
lenyediana - (same as "makidiana"), the mumps, commonly used in the plural.
lenyeketsane - scallops cut out on two pieces and fitted together.
lenyêl6 - excrete; dross of iron; refuse from iron; refuse from iron smelting.
lenyena - (same as "lengenana"), an ear-ring.
lenyenana - side of ankle; malleolus.
lenyenyane - /e-, same as /engengana, an ankle.
lenyêt6 - /Je-, siInc.or manyêtd, same as lengêtê, a little bit of anything nipped off.
lenyibi - stinc.or manyibi, seal.
lenyôra - /e-, thirst.
ledbê - sinc.oFr madbêd, a low flat-roofed shelter, formerly with a grass roof.:.
leodi - sinc.or maodi, a tuft of long hair; flax; tow.
leofa - err; make a mistake. —.
leofaditse - has made sinful, or wicked.
leofaka - sin, or err much.
leofala - become wicked, or sinful.
leofatsa - (same as "Jeofisa"), cause to sin or err.
leofêla - sin for; err for; sin against.
leofile - has erred.
leofisa - which is rarely used; cause to sin, or err; tempt.
leofisitse - has caused to sin, or err.
leofisitswe - has been caused to sin, or err.
leofisiwa - being caused to sin or err.
leofiwa - or erred.
leoma - /e-, a secret; initiation songs taught to initiates about sex matters.
leêta - a field; a garden with ripening grain; a group of gardens. Used chiefly in the plural.
leotlana - /e-, a chief's officer; a town policeman.
ledtlhê - siInc.oF madtlhd, a wrinkle; a twirl; a curl.
leoto - /e-, same as lekoto a leg; a wheel.
leotwana - /e-, same as lekotwana, vim. oF leoto, a pole, one of a set that is dug into the ground to support the roof of a hut.
leotwanakgogisi - pulley.
leowang - a crested crane, red and white in colour.
lepa - observe; notice; take notice of; watch carefully; tie in an intricate and difficult knot; puzzle someone with a riddle; in witchcraft, to hunt for the spirits of people.
lepa-nak6 - watch time.
lepai - siING.oF mapai, a soft cotton blanket; an inexpensive, not so large blanket.
lepaka - observe; notice much; riddle many times.
lepakôê - sinc.or mapakê, a pole, beer that is set aside for the head of a homestead.
lepaku - sinc.or mapaku, a pointer dog.
lepantiti - sinc.or mapantiti, prisoner.
lepara - /e-, same as lopara and loparapara, the upper inner part of a man's thigh, or that of a male anima]: space between legs; not used of a female; a wide step.
lepara - hold fast.
leparapara - inner side of thigh. -.
leparêla - similar to ngaparêla, which is more frequently used; hold fast to.
leparetse - similar to ngaparetse, has held fast to.
lepatata - traditional trumpet.
lepê - cL.s Je-, any; none; some, Used mainly to express the absence of; ga go nq lepê, there is none.
lepele - sinc.or mapele, genital organs (male or female); the fore or front part, mainly used in the plural.
lepeleditse - has caused to hang down; has suspended.
lepeleditswe - has been caused to hang down; has been suspended.
lêpêlêga - be hanging; be hung.
lêpêlêgêla - /êpêlêga, hang down for or to.
lepelegetse - has hung down to.
lepelegile - has become hung.
lêpêlêla - hang down; dangle; suspend.
lepeletse - has hung down; is suspended.
lepempetlhwane - a small boy just big enough to herd kids of goats.
lepere - has held fast to.
leper6 - leprosy [borrowed].
lephaetla - sinc.or maphaetla, same as lephatladika, a flat country on either side of a river.
lephaga - sinc.or maphaga, split in ear (as mark).
lephago - sinc.or maphago, ledge. Jephata n.s /e-, siInc.oF maphata, department.
lephatladika - sinc.or maphatladika same as lephaetla, a flat country on either side of a river.
lephatsa - a garden ploughed by a community for its ruler.
lephoi - sinc.or maphoi, same as leeba, a pigeon; a dove.
lephoko - /e-, foam; frothy expectoration.
lephoto - a knot ina stick, or piece of timber; a place in a branch, or reed where a twig has been cut off. Jephêtêphot6 n.s le-, sinc.or maphêtêphêto, a waterfall; a cascade; a cataract.
lepile - has noticed, observed, etc.; has tied in a difficult and intricate knot.
lepitIhwa - [oss], a wild animal of the interior.
lepodisi - policeman.
lepologa - be thick or viscous, as tar when poured out; do halfheartedly; lack industriousness; be lethargic or inert.
lepologêla - (same as "nyepologêla"), be thick and viscous, as tar when poured out for.
lepologile - (same as "nyepologile"), has become thick or viscous, as tar when poured out.
lepolotsê - has untied a difficult knot; has solved a riddle; has made viscous.
lepono - nakedness.
lepotokwane - siING.oF mapotokwane [oBs|, a species of wild animal found in the interior.
lerabaraba - sinc.or marabaraba many-coloured.
lerabêlê - sinc.or marabêlê (For) rebel.
leradu - siING.oF maradu, a cow kept about the homestead for milking purposes.
lerago - (same as "lesago"), a buttock. prov., kgotlaganya marago.
leraka - siINGc.oF maraka, same as lekaso and lekgomane, a species of gourd eaten when tender; dry gourds are used for making calabashes.
lerakantshwane - a species of edible bulbshaped fruit which grows on a creeper called losê.
lerakôê - sinc.or marakê, a stone wall. Lerala n.s le-, No sine,a village in the Ngwato district.
lerama - a cheek.
lerane - /e-, plover.
lerang - a ray of light.
leranodi - (same as "letlhalosi"), adverb.
leranyane - /e-, problem.
lerapê la mokwatla - a lumbar vertebra; la molala, cervical vertebra.
lerapôê - siING.oF marapê, a trap; kgori e bona mae lerapê ga e lo bone.
lerapôê - siInc.oF marapê, bone.
leratla - sinc.or maratla, a great atter; the noise of a crash; a crashing noise.
lere - a ladder [borrowed].
lere - (same as "¢lisa"), bring.
lereditse - has brought for.
lereditswe - has been brought for.
lereka - mental defective.
lerêmêla - similar to sebêtlêla, a chip.
lerêtê - testis; scrotum.
leretse - bring to, or for.
leriba - siING.oF mariba, an overhanging ledge; the peak of a cap; anything overhanging, as the top of the eye socket in the case of sunken eyes.
leribêla - /e-, sinc.or maribêla, rarely.
leribi - sinc.or maribi, a lump of wet ay; dough; a ball of dung prepared for smearing.
lerile - has brought.
lerilwe - has been brought.
lerinini - a gum, or place in the gum where a tooth is missing.
leris6 - (same as "lerusêd a species of large edible bulb").
leritiba - one left to guard the town or food, etc.
leritê - veal.
leriwe - being brought.
lerobana - pore.
lerdbêôrôb6 - sinc.or mardbêrêbê influenza; death in large numbers; an epidemic.
lerole - /Je-, sinc.or marole, powder; dust.
lerôl6 s - see app. p. xxi, silly; of weak understanding.
lerololwane - /e-, sinc.or marololwane, a nighthawk.
lerênêpê - the gleaning.
leronthêôthê6 - sinc.or maronthêthd, a deep small scar; a dot.
leroo - /e-, same as letshoo a paw.
lerophi - /e-, same as lebadibadi and lesophi, a blister; small boil; corn. de.
lerêôp6 - a range of hills; a mountain range; the top of a long hill; a plateau.
lerêse - a bunch of berries, grapes, etc.
lerothodi - /e-, a drop of water, rain, etc.
lerotobolo - a sand hill; a sandy slope where people once lived.
lerêtsê - (same as "lekatane and lesdtše"), a melon; a melon that not of the sweet species.
leru - a oud. ID. ExPR maru a thibile.
leruarua - a whale; a large fish; a sea monster.
lerubisi - an owl spoken about contemptuously.:.
lerudi - /e-, a shoulder.
lerula - Anacardiaceae.
lerum6 - /e-, a spear; a bullet.
lerura - /e-, a green plant with a very strong smell.
lerwana - little ant.
lerwanale - siING.oF marwanale, water thorn.
lerwe - (same as "leriwe"), being brought.
lesa - let alone; leave alone; permit or allow.
lesaba - a great secret meeting.
lešaba - sinc.or masaba, a grain of the type of corn that is used as a first step in the brewing of beer; soft whitish rock used for painting wall patterns and eaning wooden bowls.
lesabaro - a knapsack.
lesadi - a night garment [archaic].
lesafa - a spendthrift; a squanderer.
lešafe - (same as "leswafe"), an albino.
lešaga - sinc.or masaga, head of cattle with longer horns.
lesagaripana - /e-, very large number of small things, including rash on a skin.
lesag6 - (same as "lerag6"), a buttock; one side of a fundament.
lesai - a flea.
lesaibôk6 - siING.or masaibôkôê,a very big goat; an angora goat [borrowed].
lesaisai - a swarm: F multitude; a crowd.:.
lesaka - a cattle kraal; a sheep fold; a pen.
lesaka - permit much or many; allow many; leave much.
lešala - sinc.or masala, a large white stone; a white rock.
lešalaba - sinc.or masalaba, aloud shouting, usually an expression of tremendous excitement.
lešala6 - (same as "lešalaba"), which is more frequently used; a loud shouting.
lesalêla - sinc.or masalêla, a sole survivor; a surviving person.
lesama - (same as "lerama"), a cheek.
lesana - leave each other; stop holding each other or let go each other.
leša6 - a loud shouting, same as lešalaba, which is more frequently used.
lesap6 - (same as "lerapê"), a bone.
lesapê6 la selalê - pelvic girdle.
lesea - (same as "losea"), a baby.
lesedi - siNc.or masedi, light; a light.
leseditse - has left alone for; has allowed for.
lesediwa - (same as "lesetswa being left alone for"),; being allowed for.
lesefetetsi - intransitive.
lesegd - a blessing; good fortune; good luck.
lesêka - /e-, a bangle or bracelet; formerly a twisted metal ring worn on the arm and below the knee; a leg ornament; a coiled spring.
lešekere - famine drought.
leselamose - a magical work.
lesêlamotlhaka - similar to letêtôtd, whitetailed mongoose, destructive to fowls.
leseleditse - has allowed; has permitted.
leseleditswe - has been allowed; has been permitted.
leselediwa - (same as "leseletswa"), being allowed or permitted.
leseletsa - allow; permit; be permissive. Jesêl6 n.ci.s le-, siNG.or masêlê, wide, flat winnowing basket. Jesel6 n.ci.5 Je-, noun. ' Jesêlwane N.CL.5 /e-, SING. OF masêlwane, DER. F. sêla, a surnameless child; an illegitimate child. an.
lesenamêlôê - sinc.or masenamêlêd, the opening in a wall between the rafters; the overhanging grass and rafter in front of the doorway of a hut. on Jesenene N./e-, a terrible situation; a fearful state..: Jeserei N.a species of scorpion with large nippers, dark brown, and earth-red hairs.
lesetedi - /e-, an individual of the Griqua race.
lešetla - spongy bone tissue; the edible parts of the bone.
lesêtiha - siNc.or masêtlha, a confirmed thief; the liquor amnii.
lesetIha - /e-, sinc.or masetlha, an ostrich egg not found in the nest.
lesetsa - /esa, leave alone for; allow for.
lešeušeu - (same as "phepheng"), a big yellow or black scorpion.
lesiba - the outer skin of a goat's bowel, and the musical instrument made from it.
lesibi - /e-, siING.oF masibi, used mainly as.
lesidi s - spiteful, see app. p. xxi.
lesiêla - an orphan.
lesika - ative.
lesilo - sinc.or masilo, a silly person; a fool.
lesire - a veil for the face.
lesitIhaêka - sinc.or masitlhaêka, a harvest ant.
lesitoane - erect much branched woody plant; with woody hairy stems and well-rounded bush; Liliaceae.
lesê - spoon.
leso - death. prov., leso legolo ke ditshêgd.
leso-la-mae - (same as "ralegonyane"), common, or rhombic egg-eater snake.
lešoa - sinc.or masoa, a shout raised by a crowd; a noise.
lešobêlêlo - siING.oF masobêlo dissatisfaction.
lešodi - black glossy starling, same as legodi, which is more frequently used.
lesogo - a partridge including the red-winged one.
lesogodi - siInc.oF masogodi, a thick swarm of locusts; a heavy shower of rain.
lesogotlho - sinc.or masogotlho, rash on thighs.
lesogwana - a young virile person.
lešokgo - sinc.or masokgo, same as lesibisibi and similar to phepheng, a black scorpion. lešokgola (mašokgola) n. s le-, toddler.
lesokgola - sinc.or masokgola, a child just able to run about.
lešokgwê - sinc.or masokgwê, a large black scorpion that is extremely venomous.
lešoko - sinc.or masoko, foward; stubborn; obstinate.
lesôk6 - /e-, siNc.or masôêkê, a wooden ladle.
lesôkôlêla - sinc.or masdkêlêla heartburn; waterbrash.
lesdlê - /e-, sinc.or masêlê, a large calf; a large unweaned calf, or kid; a soldier.
lesologa - become weary, or numbed, as arms by a heavy weight; hang down, as hands or wings; be swollen (used only of the private parts of either sex).
lesologile - has become weary or numbed, as arms by a heavy weight.
lesolola - as a bird its wings, or a person the hands; reach, or pull anything down.
lesolotsê - has lowered, as a bird its wings or a person the hands; has reached, or pulled anything down.
lesoma - /e-, a species of lily.
lesomê - ten.
lesomê-le-bobedi - /Je-, dozen.
lesomêpedi - /e-, siING.oF masomêpedi dozen.
lesôm6 - /e-, a party of people; a group of people, birds, etc.; team.
lesompu - the rounded part of a hedge, garden or kraal.
lesonêl6 - /e-, siInc.oF masonêlê, a socket.
lesonya - ponerine ant, or matebele, ant; a large jet-black ant.
lesope - (same as "lerope"), a ruin; a deserted house, or ruins of a kraal.
lesophi - sinc.or marophi, same as lerophi and lebadibadi, a blister.
lesori - a gift toa maternal uncle; a gift of certain things to a relative, or older person; commonly used in its plural form.
lesotla - sinc.or masotla, a land ploughed freely for the chief by tribesmen.
lesêtlhê - the scrotum; the scrotum of a castrated animal.
lesotlê - contempt; mockery.
lesêtsê - (same as "lekatane and lerêtsê"), a melon of the type that is not sweet; musk mellon.
lesowa - similar to lesalaba, a shout, as of a multitude.
lesubu - (same as "lesufu"), which is more frequently used, a thighbone or upper leg bone of an animal or human being; the upper arm bone.
lesudu - (same as "lefudu and seboana"), a place for threshing corn.
lesufu - (same as "lesubu"), a thighbone or upper leg bone of an animal or human being; the upper arm bone.
lešuka - auction.
lesukasuke - /e-, hurried work.
lesulê - DIAL. VAR. OF lehulê, foam from mouth or on water; white scum or foam.
lesupatsela - scout; guide.
lesupi - onstrative. lesuru DIAL. VAR. OF lesore, rarely used; a gift.
lesusu - /e-, mainly used.
lešutu - a thickness as leaves on a tree.
leswabi - sinc.or maswabi, a facial wrinkle; sweet reed that has been peeled and dehydrated by drying.
leswafe - (same as "lešafe"), an albino.
leswagadi - a plant used in tanning.
leswakge - sinc.or maswakge, the flesh at the junction of the large and small stomach of an animal.
leswala6 - sinc.or maswalad, a careless workman; a bad worker.
leswal6 - sinc.or maswalê, an incense; a blessing; an aromatic herb; a charm used to insure prosperity or success.
leswana - ~ (dintshwana), spoon.
lesware - either in persons or animals: rash, particulary that which appears ong recently shaved skin.
leswasupa S - See app. p. xxi, empty (used of a sack).
leswaswa - a strip of tobacco.
leswata - (same as "bogwata"), rash; eruption; pimple.
leswê - used frequently, dirt; filth; bad; anything disagreeable, or not liked.
lešwe - wild spinach Pentarrhinum insipidum; Pergularia daemia.
leswebelega - /e-, a hired soldier; a mercenary.
leswedi - one who despises; anything despised.
leswêfaditse - has made dirty, or filthy.
leswêfaditswe - has been made dirty, or filthy.
leswêfadiwa - (same as "leswêfatswa"), being made dirty, or filthy.
leswêfala - ê, become evil, or nasty or filthy.
leswêfatsa - make nasty, or filthy.
leswefetse - has become dirty.
leswele - /e-, same as letlhole, a blood ot.
lêta - grind very fine.
leta - wait; guard corn from birds, or drinking water from intruders, etc.; to expect. leta (leapi) N.cL.s lJe-, siING.oF mata (maapi), cataract.
letadi - sinc.or matadi, malaria.
letagwa - /e-, a drunkard.
letaka - wait much; wait long.
letam6 - siINc.oF matamd, a dam; a man-made pond.
letana - wait for one another; keep each other company.
leteane - /e-, same as letlhalerwa and lekanyane, a wild dog.
letêgêlê - sinc.or matêgêlê, an individual of mixed race; a coloured. letêla_v.s. APPL. wait for; watch over or for; guard corn from birds for.
leterôk6 - wagon; buggy; truck [borrowed].
letetsa - /e-, similar to mamina, mucus. v.s.PAss. < letêla, has waited for; has Jetetse arded corn from birds for.
lethudi - /e-, same as maribêla, a compartment under the eaves of a house; stoep under the eaves of a hut or house.
lethwalwane - /e-, a stray person.
letile - has waited; has ground very fine.
letimêla - a wandering animal, traditionally. Once found, stray domestic animals were kept at the kgotla kraal until aimed by the owner or left to be disposed of by the ruler. Nowadays, in the Republic of Botswana if unclaimed by the owner, a letimêla is sold and the proceeds are deposited in the district administration's account.
leting - (same as "ting which is more frequently used"),; a very slightly fermented porridge; a preparation in which lukewarm water is mixed with corn meal and left to ferment.
letirê - predicate same as firi. letisa_v.s. caus, cause, or help to wait; help in guarding the corn from birds.
letisitse - has caused or helped to wait.
letisitswe - has been caused to wait.
letisiwa - (same as "letiswa"), being caused or helped to wait.
letiwa - being waited; being guarded (of corn) from destruction by birds.
letla - allow; permit; reconcile; make peace; favour; honour.
letlabula - sinc.or matlabula, the time of the first ripe fruits; summer time; season preceding harvest time commonly called letlhafula.
letladika - foul rubbish; filthy refuse.
letlaka - a bird of prey; a species of vulture.
letlaleanya - child born before marriage from another man; stepchild.
letlal6 - /e-, sinc.or matlald, a hide; a skin; a covering.
letlalokwalo - /e-, sinc.or matlalokwalo parchment.
letlama - or matlama preposition.
letlametlo - sinc.or matlametlo, a bull-frog.
letlamorago - /e-, sinc.or matlamorago outcome.
letlana - become friends again, or reconcile estranged people.
letlanngwa - being reconciled one with the other.
letlantsê - has reconciled enstranged people.
letlantswê - have become friends again.
letlanwa - being reconciled with each other.
letlanya - reconcile; make peace between estranged people.
letlanye - have reconciled.
letlapa - sinc.or matlapa, same as lentswê, a stone; the lower millstone; a sewing machine.
letlaparapelo - /e-, sinc.or matlaparapelo same as leaparapelo, pericardium.
letlape - /e-, hard skin rind.
letlape - /e-, similar to lekape, a husk; a rind; a peel; a pod; a shell; a scale of a fish.
letlapu - J/e-, daintiness; delicateness.
letlatla - sinc.or matlatla, an iron ornament.
letlatlana - sinc.or matlatlana, dusk; eventide; early evening twilight; the gloaming.
letlawa - sinc.or matlawa, a necklace or girdle of beads; a pair of tongs.
letlêke - /e-, sinc.or matlêke, a rich person; one abundantly supplied.
letlêla - /e-, sinc.or matlêla, a little of everything. letlêlêla_v.s.allow; make lawful.
letlêlêlana - allow one another.
letlêlêlwa - being made lawful.
lêtlêlêsêga - become lawful; be permissible.
letleletse - has allowed; has made lawful.
letleletswe - has been allowed; has been made lawful.
letlêpêtlêpê - a silly, foolish person.
letlepu - /e-, mirth; plentitude of food, or any other material possessions; abundance, especially of food.
letIhaa - sinc.or ditlhaa, jaw; la godimo, maxilla, upper jaw; /a tlase, mandible, lower jaw.
letIhabêg6 - sinc.or matlhabêgê yeast; leaven.
letIhabula - /e-, sinc.or matlhabula, same as letlhafula, the time of the first fruits; summer time; the season preceding harvest time.
letIhadiê - /e-, sinc.or matlhadiê, the fleshy part of a knuckle of meat (pj.
letIhafu - sinc.or matlhafu, the muscle or lump of flesh in the calf of the leg, and in the arm between elbow and wrist.
letIhaka - sinc.or matlhaka, a reed; a stalk of a herbaceous plant; a straw; a stalk of corn.
letIhakamane - /e-, grass for thatching.
letIhakana - /e-, sinc.or matlhakana reed; renal prolapse.
letIhakêla - sinc.or matlhakêla, a species of the blue bird.
letIhakore - sinc.or matlhakore, same as mhama and letsatsa, flank; side.
letIhaku - sinc.or matlhaku, a bush cut for making a hedge, or fence; a cut bush, letihaku le lesa le bêewa mo go le legologolo.
letIhakwana - pi. oF Jetlhaku, a stick or thorn bush placed by a doctor to keep visitors from a house where there is sickness.
letlhale - sinc.or matlhale, a wise person; a very ever person; also used to indicate one who is wise, or cunning.
letlhalerwa - sinc.or matlhalerwa same as lekanyane or letlhalwane and leteane, a wild dog.
letIhalosi - sinc.or matlhalosi, adverb.
letlhamane - /e-, sinc.or matlhamane, the fat around the kidney.
letIhano - sinc.or matlhano, inside out.
letlhanya - sinc.or matlhanya, an active person.
letIhaôê - sinc.or matlhad, empty, or dry cases of the khwena, grub, used by women as jingling ornaments in a dance.
letIhaodi - sinc.or matlhaodi adjective.
letIhapa - a cur. Se; an insult.
letlhapagadi - a certain position or pattern of the dice, or ° bones in divination.
letIhape - sinc.or matlhape, a herd of wild animals.
letIhapêlapula - /e-, a small locust bird.
letIhapôn6 - sinc.or matlhapênd retina.
letlharapa - /e-, or ditlharapa, twigs; dry twigs for starting a fire.
letIhare - a leaf; a branch having leaves, or smaller branches on it.
letlharethunya - /e-, petal.
letIhatshe - the bottom of a deep pool.
letlhats6 - sinc.or matlhatsê vomiting.
letIhaye - sinc.or matlhaye, black root; blue bush; monkey plum; poison peach; wild coffee; Ebenaceae.
letIhodi - /e-, sinc.or matlhodi, a lentil; a species of small bean.
letlhogêla - sinc.or matlhogêla, tlhoga, a shoot springing up from the roots of a tree or from the stump of one cut down; an offspring.
letIhôgôn616 - sinc.or matlhdgêndld, a blessing; a favour; good fortune; an offspring.
letlhôgêtshweu - a species of bush with white flowers; an old man.
letlhokolotso - stnc.or matlhokolotso a strip of meat for drying as biltong.
letIhokotl6 - /e-, sinc.or matlhokotlê same as Jegotlhd, a knot in a stick, or branch where a shoot, or twig has been cut off.
letIhôlê - sinc.or matlhdlê, same as leswele, a blood ot.
letIh61616 - sinc.or matlhêlêlê, mainly.
letIhomaganyane - /e-, a small seam in a kaross.
letIhomêla - sinc.or matlhomêla, a child born after elder children have died, or born when the parents were despairing of.
letIh66 - sinc.or matlhdd, hatred.
letlotlobo - sinc.or matlotlobo, a snake skin; the scale of a fish; a piece of skin pulled off after a scald, etc.
letêbê - aripe fruit of any kind.
letobo - dimness; gloominess.
letêg6 - sinc.or matdêgê, white oth; also fifty kilograms of maize meal, sugar, etc.
letonkomane - ground nuts; monkey nuts; Fabaceae.
letototo - banded mongoose.
letsa - to ring; to dial; to telephone; cause to cry; play a musical instrument.
letsabatsaba s - multicoloured things.
letsadi - sinc.or matsadi, same as lebêtê, a bruise; a bloodbruise in the flesh; a ot of blood in the flesh caused by a bruise.
letsae - /Je-, in some dialects, it is used chiefly-of a large egg, as of a turkey, goose, or ostrich; in some dialects, It 1s used chiefly of a tiny egg, as of a louse, an insect, etc.
letsaka - ring, telephone, dial, etc. often.
letsana - make to cry mutually.
letsapa - toil; labour; weariness.
letsata - (same as "letseta"), a kind of oth, probably hessian.
lethara - litre.
letIhêôtlh6 - used of a person who takes back what he has lent before the time fixed for return has arrived; used of a person who is discriminating against another.
letšanatswai - lagoon.
letsatsa - the hole of a ground squirrel or springhare.
letsatsa - No flimsy; light, as oth.
letsatsi - the sun; a day; heat caused by the sun. letse apv. oF T., yesterday.
letse - has lain down.
letseba - a rock pigeon.
letsela - a oth.
letsêlê - (same as "lebêlê"), a grain of corn, but only in the singular; a human or animal breast.
letsema - /e-, sING.OoF matsema, communal work; the coming together by neighbours to do work in the property of one of them ona voluntary basis; time for beginning to sow.
letsêmê - siInGc.oF matsêmê, an immature corn, or sweet reed.
letseta - a species of plant; Gossypium herbaceum.
letsetha - /e-, cotton wool.
letsetê - /e-, siING.oF matsetd, a garden during weeding time; a group of gardens.
letsêtsê - siInc.oF matsêtsê, similar to makgantsêtsê, the egg or nit of a louse or flea; ever, as in ke motho yo o letsêtsê, he is a very ever person.
letšha - /e-, sinc.or matsha, a pan, or shallow lake; a vlei; a saltpan.
letšhaga - siInG.or matshaga, a young warrior.
letšhatêha - J/e-, same as lejaja matshatêha, side; flank.
letšhatla - sinc.or matshatla, peace; contentment; state of quiet living, or living in peace.
letšhega - /e-, same as letsholold, diarrhoea; a coward.
letshêgê - a trivet or three-legged stand for a pot, etc.; a stone, etc. for a pot, or kettle to stand on to be boiled.
letshegd - (same as "lesegd"), a blessing; a beatitude.
letshêrê - sinc.or matshêrê, a lochial discharge.
letshetse - a bubble.
letshoba - /e-, same as letshoha, same as leroba, a hole. prov.,go tswa ka tshoba la mogodu.
letshogadi - /e-, jackboot. 7.
letshog6 - /e-, sinG.or matshogê, shock. letshoha DIAL. vAR, letshoba, a hole.
letsholê - /e-, sinc.or matsholê, a hunt; a hunting party; a meeting of males of a tribe that amounts to a secret kgotla, held in the veld.
letsholol6 - diarrhoea.
letshoo - /e-, same as leroo, a paw print or spoor of a wild animal.
letshoroma - (same as "motêtêsêlê"), ague; malaria; rigor; shiver; fever; influenza.
letshotê]6 - (same as "motshotêlê dry dung"),; dusty cattle dung; manure.
letšhotšha - /e-, by chance; unexpectedly; inadvertently; accidentally; by misadventure.
letshuti - siINc.oF matshuti, a shadow made by a oud.
letshutitshuti - siInG.oF matshutitshuti a mass of people; a multitude, or crowd.
letshwafo - /e-, siING.oF matshwafo, same as lekgwafo, a lung.
letshwaôê - marks.
letshwenyê - siING.oF matshwenyê a trouble; a vexation; a troublesome thing.
letshwiti - crowd.
letsibog6 - (same as "ledibogê"), a ford; a drift.
letsibosi - (same as "lelatlhêlwa"), interjection; an exclamation.
letsididi - NopL., cold; coldness; peace or a solace.
lets6 - descent; tradition; way of life.
letsôg6 - (same as "lebêgê6"), an arm, from the wrist to the shoulder; a shoulder of meat.
letsêgêôtIho - sinc.or botsdgêtlhd.
letsoku - sinc.or matsoku, red ochre used with fat as an unguent for the body.
letsolo - sinc.or matsolo, the pipe of an heap.
letsomanamane - /e-, a large brown lizard.
letsomane - a flock of goats, or sheep.
letsom6 - (same as "letshold"), a hunt; a hunting party.
letsopa - /e-, a ay for making pots, etc.
letsopetla - sinc.or matsopetla, same as legobe, very muddy water; water in which there is much mud.
letsorwane - a servant's portion of the entrails of a slaughtered animal.
letsubutsubu - a violent wind.
letsutsuba - wrinkle.
letsutsuropu - a species of bird.
letswa - (same as "lediwa"), being cried; being rung; being made to cry.
letšwa - (same as "lepiwa"), being observed, noticed, or watched carefully.
letswabi - a branch with twigs used for weaving.
letswabudu - /e-, same as letlhogêla, a shoot from the previous year's corn stalk or root.
letswai - salt.
letswala - siING.oF matswala, a small fish.
letswalanêga - sinc.or matswalandga a deceiver; a scamp.
letswal6 - sternal notch; diaphragm.
letswe - an open | grave. |.
letswee - a species of waterbuck.
letswêla - a shoot springing from the root; a sprout; a young person; an offspring; an offshoot.
letswele - (same as "lebole"), a fist; a small compact group of people.
letsweletswele - a deceiver; a slippery _ individual; a scamp.
letuuladi - sinc.or matuuladi, a silent person.
leuba - siInc.or mauba, same as loxêkêrê and lesekedi, drought; a famine caused by drought.
leubêl6 - sinc.or maubêlê, a forge; a blacksmith's shop.
leudi - sinc.or maudi, a speck; a shred, as of a blanket.
leum6 - /e-, a cow's udder. i.
leupa - a fine powder; hot ash. Jeutsana N. rarely if ever used in the singular; a maggot.
lobadi - see lebadi, a.
lobadibadi - sinc.or dipadipadi similar to /erophi, a blister.
lêbafala - (same as "ldbêga"), be kept hidden.
lobafetse - (same as "lobegile has become secret").
lobaibai - very much; extremely, np. used to describe extreme fearfulness or frightfulness.
lobaka - see lebaka, a time; a while; an opportunity; a space; a room.
lobala - sinc.or dipala, see lebala, a plain; a flat, treeless plain; that part of the body between the breast-bone and the navel.
lobalêl6 - sinc.or dipalêlê, see lebalêlê, the binding round the top of the front of a courtyard; the binding holding the rafters and thatch in position; the bottom of the thatch of a house.
lobati - sinc.or mabati, plank; splint; board.
lobea - see lebea, a potsherd.
lobebe - sinc.or dipebe, see lebebe., cream; cream that forms on fresh milk.
ldbêga - (same as "lôbafala"), be kept hidden.
lobegile - (same as "lobafetse has become secret").
lobêk6 - sinc.or dibêkê, see lebêkê contempt.
lêbêla - by suppressing the truth; deny possession of falsely; hide, or conceal from. 1p. Expr, go lêbêla dintsi.
lobelê - sinc.or mabeld, see lebeld speed; rapid pace. 1p. Expr, go ntsha lobeld, to make one to be able to run fast.
lobese - see lebese milk; fresh milk; milk not yet curdled.
lobêtê - sinc.or mabêtê, see lebêtê, a spleen; anthrax.
lobetse - has hidden, or concealed from; has denied by suppressing the truth.
lobila - (same as "mmila"), a broad path made by animals; a street or wide path.
lobile - has concealed, or hidden; has denied.
lobilwe - has been concealed, or hidden; has been denied.
lobiwa - (same as "lojwa"), being concealed or hidden; being kept secret.
lobodu - sinc.or mabodu, see lebodu a chameleon; an ox's dewlap.
lobogê - sinc.or dipogd, anything particularly tiny branches, put into a vessel in which water is carried to prevent it being spilt.
lobêlêla - sinc.or dipêlêla, see lebêlêla, a sting of an insect, like a bee or wasp.
lobônê - sinc.or dipdnê, a lamp; a light; a lantern; a lighted stick, or torch.
lobop6 - sinc.or dipopd, see lebop6, a creation; a creature; the creation; the universe.
lobôpê - sinc.or mabêpd, a highbridged nose.
lobêta - see lebêta same as lebota, lomota and lomotsana, a wall.
lobotsane - sinc.or dipotsane, see lebêtsane, a flock of kids; a bubo; a swelling under the armpit.
lobowa - siInc.or mabowa and dipowa same as poa, a bare, treeless plain; an open, treeless place.
lobu - sinc.or dimpu, brackish ground; ground where cattle lick because of its salt; salt lick.
lodi - (same as "lelodi and melodi"), the innermost bark, as of a thorntree, used for making twine; a cord; fibre.
lodule - Nopt.,a long stay in one place; a state of quiet living; contentment; eace.
lega - become bewitched; capable of being bewitched.:.
loegile - has become bewitched.
loeleditse - has made nice and tasty.
loêlêla - 1nr, be nice and tasty (used of food and drink); taste (generally used of a nice taste). loêsêga_v.s. NEUT., become bewitched, or possessed; have a strong desire to do something.
loêsegile - has become bewitched, or possessed.
loêt6 - sinc.oFr dikêtd or dinyêtd, see leêtê, same as lonyêt6, a journey; a pilgrimage.
loêtsê - a bob of hair; hair in a plait or bob.
lofaka - the part remaining of a broken thing.
lofare - a bone in the lower part of the arm; the bone in the front part of an animal's leg; bone used for a trumpet; a trumpet.
lofarê - /Jo-, a eft in a rock, or between two flat stones, or two fingers; a gorge between two mountains; an opening in a river's bank where cattle can descend to drink.
lofaso - bad movements of people.
lofata - boiled corn.
lofatsa - a splinter; a chip; a mote.
lofêlêpê - used mainly as a REL.s empty; desolate.
lofelê - area.
lofêtlh6 - sinc.or diphêtlhd, a pronged stick for stirring porridge; a herb supposed to cause cattle to thrive; the flower of the mealie or maize plant. See /ehêtihd. 16f6 N.sinc.or dilêf6, loaf [borrowed].
lofofa - sinc.oFr diphofa or diphafa see lefofa, a feather.
lofoka - the scent of rain.
lofoko - sinc.or mafoko, a word; an utterrance. prov., lefoko ga le bowe, go bowa monwana.
lofoko - used mainly as a RELS. madness; unbalanced state of mind. O lofoko, you are beside yourself.
loforotlho - used mainly as a RELS bareness, as of a tree without leaves, etc.; stripped, as a person; deprived of, as one who has had losses; bereft, as of children.
lofuka - sinc.or diphuka, see lefuka a wing; a pinion; a feather.
lofulê - sinc.or mafuld, grazing ground.
lofulê - sinc.or mafulêd, froth; foam; scum.
loga - weave. 1D. ExPR. loga maang to scheme, or devise means.:.
logaba - sinc.or mogaba, emptiness from hunger; hunger, see legaba.
logadima - sinc.or dikgadima, see ' legadima, lightning.
logaga - sinc.or dikgaga, see legaga 4 cave; a iff; a hollow under overhanging | crags; a hole in a iff. |.
logagana - become knit, or twisted together; be intertwined.
logagantsê - has twisted, or intertwined; has knitted together.
logagantswê - has been twisted, or intertwined.
logaganya - twist or intertwine; knit together.
logaganye - have become knit or twisted together.
logago - a fissure; a crack in a wall, etc.; a shallow gully; a rut, or furrow made by rain.
logaka - knit, or plait much.
logakana - be woven, or knitted together, like two hearts.
logakantsê - has caused to be woven, or knitted together.
logakantswê - has been caused to be woven, or knitted together.
logakanya - woven or knitted together.
logakanye - have woven, or knitted together, like two hearts.
logala - sinc.or mogala, see legala porridge made with sweet milk; go thuba motho logala, to lessen someone's anger.
logala - used mainly as a REL.s., wildlooking; pacify.
logalo - /o-, a loud cry, as of 'fore', etc.
logamê - milking of cows, or goats.
logapa - sinc.or dikgapa, see legapa the shell of a tortoise; peel of a melon, etc.
logare - see legare, a razor.
logare - see legare peel, as of a melon.
logare - /Jo-, the middle.
logata - sinc.or dikgata, a skull.
logatadima - /o-, baldness; a bald head.
logau - a deafening noise; a loud scream; a lion's roar. Jogeditse V.S.PFT. < logetsa, has dropped in, as oil in an engine; has oiled.: Jogeditswe V-S. pass. < logeditse, has been oiled. Jogediwa V.S.PASS. < logetsa, same as logetswa, peing oiled. Jogêga V-S- NEUT., be knitted; become plaited. Jogêla v.S. APpPL., knit for; plait for. Jogetla N.a despised portion of food; a mussel shell. Jogetsa V.S.APPL. instil drops.; - Jogetsa V.S.SIMP., drop in, as oil, medicine, etc. Jogetse V.S.PFT. < logêla, has knitted for. Jogetswe V-S.PASS. < logetse, has been woven for. Jogile v.S.PFT., has knitted; has plaited. Jogisa v.S.CAUS. cause OF help to weave. Jogisitse V.S. PFI. < logisa, has caused or helped to weave. logisitswe vV.S.PASS. < logisitse, has been caused or helped to weave. Jogisiwa V.S.PASS. < logisa, being caused or helped to weave.
logiwa - being woven, or plaited.
logobata - a very tall person. |.
logobe DER F - S, Same as letsopetla, dirty murky or muddy water.
logodu - siING.oF magodu, a vegetable dish with such ingredients as melon and beans, cooked and mashed; pottage; broth.
logêg6 - sinc.or dikgdkgê, see legdgo the skin, or crust on cold porridge; bread crust; a scab.
logoko - /o-, sinc.or magoko, see legoko young green grass springing up on a burnt patch; black patch of burnt grass with new grass springing up.
logôl6 - heath-like plant; a species of karoo bush; an evergreen shrub with yellow flowers.
logong - /o-, sinc.or dikgong, see legong a piece of wood.
logonnyana - sinc.or dikgonnyana see legonnyana, vim. oF legong, a small piece of wood; a small snake resembling a bit of dry wood.
logop6 - sinc.or dikgopê, see legopê a rib.
logora - sinc.or dikgora, see legora similar to seêmana, a hedge or fence made.
logwa - (same as "logiwa"), being knitted.
logwadi - sinc.or digwadi, same as Segodi, nkgodi or mankgodi, pale chanting goshawk; hawk.
logware - /o-, a single springbok.
logwere - a green tree snake, believed to have two sets of fangs, but only the hind set is very poisonous; a boomslang; a big calf ready to be weaned.
logwêtê - No PL.,a bald patch; any patch.with hair or wool removed; a skin having no hair or wool, tlhdgê e e logwêtê, a completely bald head; shaven face; naked.
lohihiri - sinc.or mahihiri, cartilage; the umbilical cord of an animal. See lehihiri.
lohuba - sinc.or dikhuba inflammation of the lungs; consumption, or pulmonary tuberculosis [archaic].
lohumê6 - sinc.or dikhumd, see lehumê, wealth; treasure; riches.
lohuredika - /o-, the soft part on the edge of a blade bone.
loile - has become thick; has thickened (used of food, or drink); has bewitched.
loilwe - has been bewitched.
loisa - cause to bewitch; help to bewitch.
loisa - make food, or drink come to the desired thickness; create excitement.
loisêga - becoming thick, as food; thickening, as food, or drink.
loisêga - cause to become bewitched.
loisitse - has caused food to thicken.
loisitswe - has been caused to bewitch.
loiwa - being bewitched.
lojwa - NoPL.,same as lejwa, go astray permanently, such as livestock, as in go ya lojwa.
lojwa - (same as "lobiwa"), being kept secret; being concealed, or hidden.
loka - flavour, or season with salt, sugar etc.
lokaba - a notch, ina plate, or knife etc.
lokadu - a space under an overhanging rock, or crag.
lokala - sinc.or makala and dikala, a thicket of camelthorn trees; a camelthorn forest.
lokaloka - go reluctantly; move about all alone.
lokalokile - has moved about all alone.
lokase - same as lokeigane, which is more frequently used; location; a settlement of second-ass or neglected tizens [borrowed].
lokêla - etc. for.
lokêlêla - Joka, fill up, as a pot in which soft food is boiling and sinks down; cram with words and go on talking.
lokeletse - has filled up; has crammed with words and gone on talking.
loketse - has seasoned, or flavoured with salt, etc., for.
lokgaba - siINc.or makgaba, a small hill.
lokgabana - siING.or makgabana, pm. or lokgaba, a small stone; a pebble; gravel; a small hillock; a low hill, or ridge.
lokgadikgadi - sinc.or makgadikgadi a large glittering surface, as a large lake.
lokgaphê - sinc.or makgaphd, smeared patterns on the floor, made with cow dung by African women.
lokgarapana - loose gravel.
lokgêrê - /o-, a dry waterless country; a parched land.
lokgêrê - dry and waterless; parched.
lokgoba - (same as "logobe and letsopetla"), a pool of trampled water; a muddy pool.
lokgôp6 - crooked.
lokgorokgoro - a long time ago.
lokgwarapana - loose gravel.
lokhadu - /o-, an eggshell; a piece of eggshell of fowl or birds.
lokhaêtla - No e e lokhaêtla a baking pan. lokhêfê apy, brittle; light in texture.
lokhi - sinc.or dikhi, a thicket of briars; a forest of a species of small thorny bushes.
lokhibe - OLL. a thicket or forest of mokhibe trees.
lokhukhwa - OLL. a drove; lokhukhwa lwa bontshe, a drove of ostriches.
lokhuru - an eggshell.
lokhutlo - (same as "lorutle"), humpbacked; having a stooping gait; going along with head bent down; motho yo o lukhutlo, a humpback.
lokile - sugar, etc.
lokilwe - has been seasoned, or flavoured with salt, sugar, etc.
lokiwa - being seasoned, or flavoured with salt, etc.
lokoditse - has sweetened the mouth.
lokoja - the collar, or corner of a kaross; the hem of a woman's skirt.
lokologa - joints become separated (accidentally).
lokologêla - be out of joint for.
lokologile - has become out of joint.
lokolola - put out of joint; break off at a joint; alter the position of meat in a pot by putting the bottom Pieces on the top.
lokololwa - being put out of joint.
lokolotsê - has put out of joint.
lokôpê - a sickness in goats which ~ makes them act as if mad. madcap [borrowed].
lokoro - a piece of wood, ete. bent like a bow; a torso that is bent like a bow.
lokotlêga - become broken in pieces, or splintered; be thoroughly tender, of cooked meat; be utterly exhausted, or fatigued, as a tired man.
lokotsa - remove bad taste from the mouth; dry up Saliva when too abundant.
lokotswana - (same as "lobotana"), a low wall.
loku - a thicket or forest of the moku a species of camelthorn tree.
lokubane - dislike; contempt used mainly as an s. abv. wrrH PREF, ka a mo leba ka lokubane, he looked at him contemptuously or disdainfully.
lokururwana - (same as "lekgarapana gravel").
lokurwana - a stony country.
lokwabê - a skin bag.
lokwal6 - see lekwald, a book; a letter.
lokwalomosepele - (same as "pasepote"), passport.
lolama - be straight as a path; go straight to a place; be upright in character, true, faithful. lolamisa_v.s. caus, make straight, as a path.
lolamisitse - has made straight, as a path.
lolamisitswe - has been made straight, as a path.
lolamisiwa - being made Straight, as a path.
lole - has fought; also used to mean has quarrelled.
lolea s - empty.
loleme - siING. oF diteme, a tongue; a language.
lolengwana - /o-, see lelengwana, a tonsil; uvula; epiglottis; itoris.
lolêse - NoPL., hunger; starvation; emptiness; smallness of chest, or stomach, as from hunger, or rapid growth.
lomaka - bite, or sting much. Jomana n.cL.11 Jo-, withered berries that have died on the tree.
lomana - bite one another.
lomantsê - has dovetailed, or fitted two pieces of wood nicely together.
lomanya - dovetail, or fit two pieces of wood nicely together.
lomao - (same as "thokê"), a long awl for sewing skins; an eyeless needle; syringe.
lomap6 - sinc.or dimapê, see lemapê, a wooden peg, or nail.
lomati - see lemati, a board; a plank; table, or desk.
lomêga - cup; have blood drawn by cupping.
lomêgêlêla - make a false accusation against.
lomêgêlêlwa - being falsely accused; being adopted, as a cow a calf after its own mother is dead; being adopted, of a calf so taken.
lomegeletse - has made a false accusation against.
lomegile - has cupped; has had blood drawn by cupping.
lomegiwa - (same as "lomegwa being fostered").
lomêla - fix, or let in, as one piece of wood into another; mortise; dovetail; bore a hole in a native axe handle for an axe; eat porridge with a tiny piece of meat as relish; cut or bite for.
lomeleditse - has put another person at a disadvantage; has deprived another person of an opportunity to gain.
lomeleditswe - has been put at a disadvantage.
lomelediwa - (same as "lomeletswa"), being put at a disadvantage.
lomelêlwa - being separated for.
lomeletsa - put another person at a disadvantage; deliberately refuse to help another; deprive a person of an animal by letting it wander on unchecked when one could have turned it back; by omission, or commission to do that which is calculated to disadvantage some other person.
lomêpê - siING.oF mamêpê, see lemêpê, same as lomêpa, a piece of honeycomb with honey in it.
lometse - has fixed or let in, as one piece of wood into another, etc.
lomipi - see lemipi, a fatty membrane enveloping the bowels; a peritoneum; a caul put on a betrothed girl's head.
lomolêla - separate for.
lomoloditse - has caused to separate.
lomologa - become separate; be unhooked, as a trailer.
lomologana - separate mutually.
lomologantsê - has caused to separate.
lomologanya - cause to separate.
lomologanye - have separated mutually.
lomologêla - become separate for.
lomologile - has become separate.
lomolola - separate.
lomololêla - separate for.
lomololêlwa - being separated for.
lomololetse - has separated for.
lomolotsa - cause to separate.
lomonoko - Nopt.a difficult, or steep place in a hill, or iff.
lomêta - (same as "lobêta"), a wall; the wall of a house; a bank of a river.
lomotana - /o-, same as lebotana, which is more frequently used, pIM. OF /omota, a small or low wall or bank of a river. lomotsana DIAL. vAR. OF Jomêta, same as lomdta and lobêta, a wall; the wall of a house; a bank of a river.
lona - AND CL.2A bo-, 2ND PERS you (PL.) and yours.
lona - PRoN.cL.s Je-, ANDCL.11 lo-, it.
lonaka - see lenaka horn; hooter.
lonala - a nail of a finger, or toe; a talon of a bird; a spur of a cock, see Jenala.
lonamagadi - /o-, a group of females.
lonaôê - see lenad, a foot. 1p. ExPR, go baba lonaê.
longamu - sinc.or dingamu, the flank of an animal.
longana - species of bush, Artemisia afra, used as medicinal tea.
longana - a herd of giraffes; a collection of hook thorntrees, or bushes; a mastoid; a traditional bugle.
longangale - dried strips of melon; dried fruit.
longôpê - sinc.or mangêpê, a channel; a gully; a deep ditch.
longwa - (same as "lomiwa"), being bitten.
lonkg6 - sinc.or menkgê, smell; odour; taste. Jonkitšhutu Nn. (ror, longitude.
lonona coLL - a number of males.
lonti - strap.
lonyalê - sinc.or dinyald, see lenyalê, a marriage.
lonyana - /o-, a group of children.
lonyatsôê - a byword; contempt; contemptuousness; dishonour.
lonyêt6 - sinc.or dinyêtd, same as loêt6, a journey; a pilgrimage.
loôb6 - sinc.or didbê, see ledbê, a shelter made of poles and grass, etc.; a booth; a makeshift dwelling.
loobu - sinc.or maobu, brackish ground.
looditse - has sharpened; has ground on a grindstone.
looditswe - has been sharpened.
loodiwa - (same as "lootswa"), being sharpened.
looka - acacia karoo thicket.
lookwane - oil; petrol; diesel.
loênyane - a flock of lambs.
lootele - haze; haziness; dimness.
looto - (same as "lootele"), haze haziness, dimness.
lootsa - sharpen; grind on a grindstone.
lootwana - pry oF looto, see leotwana, a wheel; poles that support the roof.
lopa - ask; ask for; ask a favour; Tequire: make a solemn request; beg.:.
lopalala - stand idly; stand as one who is undecided as to what to do.
lopalê - a scaby disease in goats or sheep.
lopane - /o-, mainly used as a REL.s.in a negative construction, lobaka lo se lopane, a very short distance, or space; a while; a little while; for a small time, or short distance.
lopapa - a shallow pool of rainwater.
lopara - (same as "loparapara and lepara"), the upper inner part of a man's thigh or of a male animal (not used of a female); a trouser leg; a wide step.
lopara - a stretcher used to carry the sick, or dead.
loparapara - (same as "lopara and lepara"), the inner part of a man's thigh or of a male animal; a trouser leg; a wide step.
loparwana - /o-, a purging disease among sheep; diarrhoea in sheep.
lopatikê - /o-, lean; thin, or ill-favoured of cattle.
lopawa - (same as "mokong"), a steep place.
lopê - CLS.5 AND 11. none; any.
lopêla - currying favour.
lopêtlêkê - wide and shallow, as a pool, or large vessel.
lophadiphadi - [o-, floodwater spreading out like a lake.
lophaetla - s, flat and open.
lophatlhadika - s, very open, as ox horns.
lophatlho - sinc.or diphatlho, see lephatlho, a fraction of; half (of anything that is divisible).
lophêg6 - a large piece of a broken platter, still of some use.
lopile - has required; has begged, etc.
lopisitse - has caused or helped to ask.
lopisitswe - has been caused to ask.
lopisiwa - (same as "lopiswa being caused to ask").
lopiwa - (same as "lotšwa"), being asked for a favour; being begged; being asked earnestly.
loriba - sinc.or mariba, a forehead as a baboon's; a bow, overhanging peak, or a wagon tent; the peak of a cap.
lorile - has dreamt, or dreamt about.
loritê - stewed meat well stirred up; veal.
lorogoroga - dregs of a beer cup.
lorole - dust; duststorm.
lorêlê - sinc.or dithdtê, a troop of baboons.
loropo - /o-, a range of hills.
lororwana - an infant.
lorotho - /Jo-, sinc.or marotho, dimness; a dim light; twilight.
loruê - livestock.
lorutle - sinc.or marutle, same as lokhutl6, crook-backed; motho yo o lorutle, a hunchback.
lorutlêl6 - old bushes in a hedge when it is renewed; old rafters in a house when reroofed.
lorwana - siING.oF marwana, a thicket or grove of white thorntrees.
lorwê - see lerwê small red ants.
losa - (same as "lwantsha"), cause to fight against; cause to hunt to kill.
lošaba - siINc.oF mašaba, same as lesaba, a grain of the type of corn used in brewing of beer; soft whitish rock used for painting wall patterns and eaning wooden bowls.
losabaro - a knapsack.
lošagarana - small stone; gravel; fine beads; small teeth.
losagaripana - a large mass of small or young things.
losai - lo-, naked; destitute (DJ.
losaisai - a swarm, or large number of moving things.
logalaba - /o-, sinc.or mašalaba, a shout or outcry of a crowd of people.
losane - a pointed stick; a stick used to stab the wild melon in a boy's game.
losase - treeless country.
lo8ê - /Jo-, a creeper having edible bulblike fruit; see /esê, Pentarrhinum insipidum or Pergularia daemia.
losea - /o-, sinc.or ditshea, see lesea, an infant; a baby; a suckling.
lošekedi - (same as "losekêrê or leuba"), both of which are more commonly used; famine; drought.
lošela - (same as "lesêlôê"), winnowing basket.
losetsanyana - a number of female children.
losi - sinc.or dintshi, similar to lotshitshi, the bank of a river; the edge of a riverbank; the brim of a cup; an eyebrow; an eyelash; an eyelid.
losiba - sinc.or ditshiba, see lesiba the outer skin of a goat's bowel, and the musical instrument made from it.
losie - a jackal.
losika - sinc.or ditshika, see lesika, a vein; an artery; a sinew; a family; a generation; a relative.
losire - a poke or screen for the eyes used by bojale girls; a shade for sore eyes.
loso - death.
lošok6 - perversity.
lošolola - (same as "lesolola"), drop or fold as the hands of a person, or wings of a bird.
logulê - sinc.or mafuld, see lefuld froth; foam from the mouth; scum on a river.
loswab6 - (same as "segwapa"), which is commonly used; biltong; dried meat; mainly used for dried fruit and grass.
loswaêla - a skeleton.
loswaê - siING.oF maswad, stewed meat well stirred up; minced meat.
losware - stony ground on which one cannot walk barefoot; rash on shaved head.
lota - walk, or run gracefully, or proudly; puzzle, or confound with a riddle; plug, or seal a hole, or crack with wax; patch with powder.
lotaka - or seal much.
lotana - confound each other with riddles or puzzles.
lotêrê - a syphilitic sore.
lotete - very red blood in dysentery.
lotha - (same as "ntha see letha"), sinew, or muscle of a lean animal; a thin membrane; a placenta; a temporary house, or tent.
lotha - living.
lothêka - sinc.or mathêka, see lethêka, loin; waist.
lotile - has ground, or pounded to powder; has puzzled, or confounded with a riddle; has plugged, or sealed a hole.
lotla - destroy; kill; beat to death.
lotlatlana - sinc.or matlatlana, dusk; eventide; early evening; twilight; gloaming.
lotlawa - a long string of beads; a girdle of beads round the loins; a pair of tongs.
lotlêga - become destroyed, or beaten to death; tell secret news; give a hint, or inkling of a thing. lotlêgêla_v.s. appL, tell secret news to; give a hint to.
lotlegetse - has told secret news to; has given a hint to.
lotlegile - has told secret news; has given a hint.
lotlêla - lock.
lotlêrê - sinc.or ditlêrê, a crack. lotlha DIAL. var oF Jotla, destroy; kill; beat to death.
lotihaa - sinc.or ditlhaa, same as lotlhaya, a jawbone.
lotlhabê - a thing to pierce with; a fork for taking meat out of a pot.
lotIhabula - the time for the ripening of fruit; the season of abundant grass; the season of abundance.
lotIhagare - a reaped garden; ground left fallow.
lotIhaka - and cout. a reed; straws. 1D. EXPR, O dule lotlhaka, his bowel has come down, as in dysentery.
lotlhaka - a troop of hartebeest.
lotihakore - (same as "letlhakore"), a person's side; the side of something; the flank.
lotIhale - /o-, a place for drying sliced vegetable marrow.
lotIhana - quarrel with one another; Oppose one another.
lotIhanêla - stand in defence of, or help one person against another; help another in a quarrel.
lotIhanetse - has stood in defence of; has helped one in a quarrel.
lotlhantsê - has caused a quarrel; has stirred up strife.
lotIhanya - cause to quarrel; stir up strife; make mischief between; cause dissension by circulating false stories; act as a busybody.
lotlhanye - have quarrelled with one another; have opposed one another.
lotlharapa - sinc.or ditlharapa, a thin dry stump; bits of thin dry pieces of wood; also a dead tree still standing and having branches.
lotlhaya - sinc.or ditlhaya, same as lotlhaa, a jaw; a jawbone.
lotlhêga - be smitten, or perish; refer to a matter casually; give an inkling, etc. of a matter.
lotlhodi - 9n.,pigeon pea; pigeon bean; Favaceae; ditlhodi, lentils; a field of lentils.
lotIhêdkwa - a grass stalk, particularly when dry. 1. Expr, go robalêlwa ke ditlhdkwa. prov., lotlhêkwa lo tshela mo masitaokêng.
lotlhono - the flesh side of a skin; a woolly tuft underneath a well-brayed skin; a piece of meat cut off the side of an animal before it is disembowelled.
lotihware - sinc.or matlhware, a grove of wild olive trees.
lotlolola - unlock.
lotlolotsê - has unlocked.
lotlôp6 - sinc.or matldpê, the comb of a cock, guinea fowl, etc.
lotlowa - sinc.or matlowa, a net; a pair of tongs for taking coals from the fire.
lotobo - (same as "lootele and looto"), obscurity in speech.
lotoloditse - has investigated carefully; has pursued a matter beyond reasonable limits.
lotolola - continue on a communication broken off; pursue a matter beyond reasonable limits. Jotolotsa v.S.CAUS. < lotolola, make very careful enquiry about a thing so as to know thoroughly; investigate carefully; pursue a matter beyond reasonable limits. Jotolotsê v.s.Prr. < lotolola, has continued a communication broken off; was pursued as a matter beyond reasonable limits. Jotona N.CL.11 lo-, SING.OF matona [archaic],a number of males.
lotshitshi - similar to losi, dried-up riverbed; a beach; the shore, of a stream or sea; the brim of a cup.
lotgho - fat for smearing.
lotshwa6 - a mark on an animal denoting ownership; a brand; a distinguishing mark.
lotsê - a tribe; a race.
lotsope - a thickish fluid.
lotsopêtla - sinc.or ditsopdtla, see letsôpêtla, mud.
lot'wa - (same as "lopiwa"), being asked for a favour; being begged; being asked earnestly.
lotswaisa - the epidermis, or outer layer of the skin.
lotswalê - the diaphragm; fear; fright; conscience.
lêtwê - NOPL., lead [borrowed].
loum6 - (same as "Joungê"), the fruit of a (woman's) womb; children; offspring.
loungd - sinc.or dikungwa, same as loum6, fruit.
loupa - sinc.or dikupa, powder; dust; finely ground meal; hot ashes; a hot hearth without nders; a fireplace with dust removed. lêwa_v.s.simp., become thick, as porridge.
lêwa - (same as "/da"), bewitch.
lowa - a living skeleton, i.e. a person much emaciated; a collection of bones; a particular pattern in which a diviner's bones have fallen.
lowa - being fought.
lêwê - No pLu., according to oral tradition, /6wê is the cave, or place from which the first man came. Iwa v.s.simp., fight; strive; quarrel. Iwadiwa v.s.pass. < lwala, same as lwatswa, being made ill by; being made sick. Iwala v.s.simp., be ill, or sick.
lwana - (same as "Jwa"), less commonly used fight; strive. Iwantsha v.s. caus. < Iwa, same as losa, cause to fight; fight against; hunt to kill. Iwantshitse v.s.prr. < lwantsha, has fought against; has fought with. Iwantshitswe v.s. pass. < Jwantshitse, has been fought against. Iwantshiwa v.s.pass. < lwantsha, same as lwantshwa, being fought with, or against. Iwatsa v.s.caus. < wala, make ill; to be sick. Iwatswa v.s. pass. same as lwadiwa, being made ill; being made sick. Iwêla v.s.appL.or lwa, fight over; fight for. Iwetse v.s.prr. < Jwala, was ill or sick.
