ma 2ND ELEMENT - < matlo a mararo three houses and of the REL. conc. < matlo a mararo, the houses are three. ma ENUM.CONC. < madi mangwe, certain or some money. st 250 ma_ COLL. NAMES OF PLANTS, magodnônd, a grove of Terminalia sericea; madubu, a grove of weeping willow trees. ma COLL. FOR NAMES OF ANIMALS, malau, a pride of lions; mabodi, a herd of goats.
ma - /e-, AND OF bo-, OF NOUNS WITH aS in lenatê, manatd, bogdbê, magobê.
maboa - hair from an animal's skin. maabane Apv. OFT, yesterday.
maabanyane - oFT, evening; after sunset; towards night.
maadim6 - NOSING., borrowed things; borrowing or a loan; borrowings or loans.
maaka - which is rarely used, same as maka, which is the preferred form; lies; falsehood.
maakgadiatla - somebody who swings his arms around.
maalosôê - graduands of an initiation school.
maan6 - schemes; devices; contrivances. prov. maand ga a site, go sita a loso.
maanwane - delta.
maanyaanya - abundance; lots of things in a disorganised state.
maaparapelo - pericardia.
maatla - strength; power. maatlakgogedi (a lefatshe) N.gravity.
maatlametl6 - No skill; orderliness.
mababane - NOSING.,a hairy caterpillar. Mababe depression Nn. area of land in Northern Botswana surrounded by the Magikwe Sand Ridge.
mabapa - NOSING. adjacent things; things that are contiguous. ID. EXPR, matlo go Sa mabapi.
mabapi - oncerned with; relating to. mabe api.s.,see be, ugliness; much dirt.
mabebe - pile of dirt; piles of trees and bushes; sweepings.
mabela ABSN - NOSING., Similar to matlêmê, pride; haughtiness; swaggering gait.
mabêlê - human or other mammalian breasts; stalagmites and stalagtites.
mabêlê - sorghum; corn.
mabêlê-a-tshupa - last year's corn.
mabêlêbêlê - a species of very small corn; millet.
mabelebele - rags and tatters, as worn by a madman, a pauper, or a traditional doctor.
mabêlêtê - wantons; licentious people.
mabelotlhomogi - and tlhomoga, hurt; compassion.
mabetla - No tongues, like tongues of fire.
mabêtlêla - (same as "dibêtlêla"), which is in common use; shavings; chips.
mabi - which is commonly used, spider webs.
mabi - a species of thistle.
mabibi - DIAL. VAR. OF mabebe, which is more commonly used, heap of dirt; piles of trees and bushes; sweepings.
mabitla - cemetery.
maboa - mushrooms; j species of edible fungi.
maboa - open plains.
maboana - small open plains. i.
mabodi - OLL. large \ flocks of goats.
mabodi - greater cane rats.
maboê - 9-, species of small hare.
mabôgê - (same as "matsêgo"), arms.
mabogodika s - DER. F. mabêgê arms, and dika, surround; ambidextrous.
mabôk6 - brains.
mabôk6 - poems; praises; praise poems.
mabole - (same as "matswele"), fists.
mabêlêla - bee or wasp stings. mabolêlêla ruri_n. rrr. true statements.
mabolobolo - puff adders.
mabolokêlôê - (same as "dipolokêlê"), barns; treasuries; granaries; storage places.
maborwana - rarely used, same as mamphorwana, young birds. prov., bana mamphorwana maatlhamêla babolai.
mabêta - walls.
mabotsa - ™ma-, NosiNG,a marriage feast.
mabu - survivor; the sole surviving child.
mabududu - dry dust.
mabudutshê - gleanings. Mabulê n. ¢.,a village in the southern part of Botswana.
maburabura - used mainly as a REL-s long, loose garments; baggy othing.
mabutswapele - and pele, first; first fruits.
madi - money; blood.
madiagotlhe - same as thukwi and kgwirima, wolf-like animals [borrowed].
madiba - (same as "makadiba"), pools in river bed; big pools.
madibog6 - (same as "matsibogo"), fords in a river; a town in the Cape Province.
madikong - probably same as madikweng, a solitary male giraffe. Madikwe n.Marico River.
madila - NosinG., thick milk; sour milk.
madilotsane - the name of the distant interior, hence the saying, ba ya madilotsane, they go away with no hope of returning.
madimabe s - and be, bad; unfortunate.
madimagale - rust on iron.
madimapeng - a game played by children.
madirelê - factory; workplace.
madis6 - NOSING., herding or grazing; pasturage. Madu N.hollows, or indentations in rocks; a natural stern. Maduba N.COLL. Combretum zeyheri.
madubana - orn about to ear.
madubedube - NosiNG., confusion of things; chaos. Madulê n.ver.r. dula, seats. Madumê n.greetings.
madumedi - young lions.
madu6 - 7a-, NOSING., wages; payment; reward; returns.
mae - and letsae, eggs.
maeba - pigeons.
maebana - young pigeon; steady rains; a good downpour in a short time.
maebarope - a pigeon.
maêbêêbê - NO SING, Spreading out and hanging down, as the branches of overhanging trees.
maêlê - which is rarely used, wise saying; maxims; proverbial utterances.
maêm6 - NOSING., Stations; rank; position of importance; status; a situation or rcumstances.
maerêgwane - (same as "maerêgo"), rarely used.
maerôg0 - 9-, an easy-going person; a credulous individual; one easily imposed upon; a gullible person.
maesamane - the English.
mafafa - nervous.
mafalôê - NOSING., scrapings.
mafaratlhatlha - NoSING.,a large selection of items; things jumbled together; a state of disorder, or confusion.
mafatla - baldness above the forehead.
mafatlha - chest; disease of chest; upper part of the body. prov. mafatlha a nku a itsiwe ka baneedi.
mafatlha - (same as "mawêlana"), twins.
mafatshe - countries; lands; worlds; national states.
mafatsie - a single duiker.
mafatswa - ABS.N.CL.6 ma-, persuasiveness.
mafega - ABS.N.CL.6 ™d-, NOSING., hastiness; illconsidered decisions, used mainly as a REL.s., o mafega, he is hasty; quick to do anything.
mafêlê - cockroaches.
mafele - (same as "mehele mountain redbuck").
mafelepe s - swelled.
mafelê - localities.
mafêl6 a beke - weekend.
maferefere - rogues; vagabonds; humbugs; cheats; crooks.
maferetsoko - ABS.N.CL.6 @-, NO SING.,a State of confusion, or dishonesty.
mafifadu s - probably DER. F. fifala, black.
mafika - rocks.
mafisa - which is rarely used, cattle which have been lent to another; cattle kept at another man's cattlepost for that individual's benefit. mafodile apv. oF MAN, indistinctly; not early (of hearing); ba utlwa mafodile, they hear indistinctly.
mafofora - remnants; crumbs of bread, etc.
mafoko - words; news; disputes.
maforwana - DIAL. vaR, that is very restricted in use, same as mamphorwana, young birds.
mafotlh6 - land or trees stripped bare.
maful6 - grazing grounds.
mafulê - foam; froth.
mafura - fat; dripping; butter; oil.
mafut6 - knots.
magaala - used mainly as a REL.s.to mean reckless; recklessness.
magabaditsane - (same as "magabala"), bitter wild cucumber.
magabala - bitter wild cucumber; small pumpkins.
magabonê - AND bdnê, ABS. PRON., their homes.
magadi - lobola; gifts traditionally made in the form of cattle, to fiancêe's parents by the prospective son-inlaw.
magaga - caves; moss; lichen; prov. ba buêlang magageng aa ba bona.
magagane - ¢, battle axe.
magagarapa - shape of an animal's horns that point sidewards and then turn forward and in; a very skinny person.
magago - similar to magagogago, ruts; gutters.
magagogago - NOSING. many cracks in the earth; many small ruts or gutters.
magakabe - pied crows; white-necked crows.
magakga - young corn nearing the earing stage.
magakgala - NosiNG., the stars of the dawning, hence very early dawn; sharpedged ouds; mahube a magakgala, the very first rays of daylight; caterpillars with glittering button-like shapes.
magakwa - crystals; flints.
magala - coals; charcoal; magala masuge N.NOPL, haste; uppish; ambitions; impulsiveness.
magalane - a yellowish snake, black under the mouth.
magalapa - palate; the roof of the mouth.
magale - the edges of the blade of knife, spear, etc.
magamugamu - a watery swelling; a juicy morsel.
magano - the inside of mouths; mouths; the words spoken, or the talking of those at a distance.
magapu - watermelons.
magare - centres.
magare - a razor blade.
magaripa - sharp cutting edges.
magaseterata - Magistrate [borrowed].
magasigasi - comfort; wel] appointed, as a house; a suite.
magatêl6 coLL - heifers; cattle that are * roughly three years old.
magatwe - hearsay.
magawegawe - disputes; uproars.
magetla - shoulders.
magoana - which is rarely used, beer given to individuals to sample its maturity.
magoana - wild goslings.
magobê - porridges.
magodi - (same as "magodiri"), black glossy starlings; black birds.
magodiri - black glossy starlings.
magodu - a dish of beans and melon.
magodu - thieves.
magofi - applause.
magêgoê - crusts of porridge on top or at the bottom of the pot; crusts of bread.
magogodi - flotsam on a river.
magdgwê - a badger. prov., magogwê o belaêla lomêpê.
magokagoka - numerous ill-fitting bits and pieces.
magoko - patches of burnt grass.
magokong - a swarm of young locusts nearly ready to fly.
magola - reaped gardens.
magôlê - deformities; blemishes.
magolê - karoo-type bushes; a species of heather-like bushes.
magolol6 - outspans; places where wagons make an overnight stop.
magoma - a species of burr weed.
magomê - ¢., bomagomê, a woman whose mouth is smeared with tortoise milk and who impersonates a god in the bojale ceremony.
magomê - siING.oF lesomê, rarely used same as masomê, tens.
magomêgomê - NOSING.,Same as masomêsomê, rarely used, numberless; without number; countless.
magomo - livestock; many herds of cattle.
magongwe - all at the same time; in a volley.
magono - 1Ag-, a person or animal with very small ears, or none at all.
magonotwana - small strong tobacco.
magopa - scrapings; gatherings of remains.
magopêlôê - small beef steaks from slaughtered animals collected by those who flay the animal.
magorog6 - arrivals; coming into the fold of livestock.
magorometso - NOSING., pour all or everything; medicine used to stimulate childbirth during labour; a medicine used as a uterine stimulant during labour.
magosi - OLL. kings; kingdoms; chiefs; chieftains.
magošo - ivory bracelets.
magotlhê - big field rats.
magotlhôê - knots in wood; knots in pieces of wood. Magototua N.a species of locust, green in colour and inedible. Magou N.wild geese. Magwagwa N.hairs of a whisker; beard on the cheeks.
magwaka - (same as "magakwa"), crystals; flints. Magwane N.big boys, pre-initiation. Magwara N.used mainly as a REL.S., rough; untutored; ignorant; a raw and ignorant person. Magwaripa N.cheats.
magwasipa - rough hewn.
magwata - NOPL.,Same as magwara roughness of a surface; blisters on a surface; a raw and ignorant person.
magwatata - hard times.
magwejana - ankles.
magweletlha - things done badly; crooked things; things done wrongly; o dirile magweletlha, he has done dishonest things.
magwere COLL - fully grown calves; calves mature enough to be weaned.
magweregwere - /7d-, NOSING., variegated; mixed colours.
magwerepa - NO PL, gravy with pieces scraps of meat in it.
mahêhê apst - used.
mainly as a - S, tlalêl6 e e mahêhê, intense distress; express; special.
mahihiri - cartilage; cartilage of the ribs.
mahuba - OLL. rarely used; chests; whole of the chest.
mahubala - a herbaceous plant that bears tubers resembling potatoes.
mahube - NoSING., the blush of dawn; the streaks of colour and light at dawn; red sky; red tinges in the sky at dawn; joint of meat.
mahubehube - a species of large, dark pigeon.
mahumapelo - grief; sad stories; sad tidings.
mahumo COLL - OLL. riches; great riches.
mahunêt6 - waves; very many knots.
mahupêla - bouts of asthma; incidents of breathlessness.
mahupu - large mushrooms.
mahupuhupu - state of being swollen and bruised from a beating; being bitten, as by bedbugs.
mahure - NosING., the yard at the back of a hut or house; domestic quarters of the house, to be avoided by guests.
mahuti - or hollows.
mahutsana - sorrows; griefs.
mahutsana - tragedy.
maibi - NosiNG. fainting or swoon.
maija - penis; genital organs.
maijadi - self sown grain.
maikaêlêlê - NO F. ikaêlêla determination; intention, or aim; intentions; purpose(s).
maikanê - oaths; vows.
maikarabêlê - responsibility.
maikatlamêtlo - a select coterie, or meetings.
maikeolê -: ikeola diversities of opinion; heresies.
maikêp6 - wickednesses; iniquities.
maikgantsh6 - boasting; self praise.
maikutl6 - feelings; sensations.
maina - names; nouns.
mainanath6 - feeble excuses.
mainane - stories; tales; fables; legends; fairy tales.
maio - (same as "makakauwe or mauwe"), crabs.
maipatê - (seipatd) excuses.
maipei - free people; squatters.
maipelê - joy; gladness.
maiphêtlhê - covetousness; envy; unprovoked behaviour. 1p. Expr, thd e a iphêtlha.
maiphitlhaphitlhwane - evening recreation; hide and seek.
mais6 - hearths.
maitekê - efforts.
maithamak6 - pretentiousness; self deceit; hollow behaviour; vanity.
maithatis6 - love charms.
maitibol6 - NOSING., first birth by people and animals.
maitisO - NOSING., evening time conversations; games, etc. before retiring to bed; hobby.
maitlabo - running around; dashing about; a state of business.
maitlhapedis6 - feigning drunkenness; drunken habits; luxuries.
maitlhôê - used by fringe dialects; eyes.
maitlhêôm6 - which is rarely used, intentions; purposes.
maitseanape - 1Ao-, know, and nape, god of wisdom; a diviner; a soothsayer; a conjurer; an expert. maitseboa apv oF T.,afternoon; from early afternoon to shortly after sunset.
maitsê6 - NOSING., manners; conduct; character; behaviour; custom; bearing.
maitsoketso - crooked ways.
maja-polaêl6 - one who reaps where he has not sown; a blood sucker.
majabatho - cannibals; man-eaters.
majak6 - ABS.N.CL.6 Mmd-, NO SING., DER. F. jaka gainful activity by someone who emigrated; the offer of one's services to be rewarded in kind. nx. traditionally, reward took the form of a portion of the harvest.
majana-a-botlhêkwa - precious stones, as diamonds, ete.
majang - grasses; weeds.
majê - or lentswê or letlapa stones.
majetla - edges of a sharp, or cutting instrument.
maj6 - parts or sections eaten, as by domestic animals, particularly in a cornfield.
makaba - pack-oxen.
makabi - (same as "mokabi"), venereal disease of men.
makabunjie - bittermelon; Colynth; common wild khama melon; Cucurbitaceace.
makaka - termites; flying ants, including the edible species.
makakaba - less widespread in use than matlhare, leaves.
makala - OLL. camelthorn trees.
makala - (same as "gakgamala"), be astonished.
makalaba - NOSING. large eyes; thick maize cobs.
makanangwana - 1A9-, the grapple plant.
makankele - 1Ao-, a very small onion-like bulb, edible and sweet.
makanokano - NOSING.,used mainly as.
makantsa - (same as "dikanta and makgantsha"), fringes; girdle ornaments.
makanyana - (same as "matlhalerwa and mateane"), wild dogs.
makaodi - (same as "maudi"), tufts of hair, or wool; locks.
makape - (same as "matlape"), rinds; scales, etc.
makarapa - mine recruits.
makatana - dikatana a large collection of rags.
makatane - (same as "marêtsê"), melons; vegetable marrows.
makatla - the uninitiated; the uncircumcised.
makatla-namane - No.
mainly as an - big numbers.
makau - (same as "makolwane"), young men.
makawe - rafts.
makê - a solitary gemsbuck.
makedi - seed beds; nurseries for plants.
makêkêtê - No sING., rough edges of object.
makeleketla - overflowing.
makenokeno - /ma-, NO SING., caprice; changeable(ness).
makete - heaviness; weight; problems; difficulties.
maketlo - broken bits of china, or earthenware.
makgaba - hills; pebbles.
makgabagany6 a seporo - level crossing.
makgabe - (same as "makgantsha"), the fringe of strings worn in front by women and girls to cover their nakedness. prov. go nna makgabe a dipapetla.
makgabêtlêla - thin slices of meat; small pieces of wood; minced meat.
makgabi - halves of an edible bulb.
makgabisa - decorations; adornments.
makgadi - the Manthatise tribe.
makgaêgê - stones with serrated edges.
makgafa - a honeycomb.
makgago - shreds that have been torn off from a garment.
makgagokgago - NO SING., very ragged garment(s); a shredded garment.
makgajane - initiators of rcumcision school.
makgakga aABs - NOSING. rudeness; impertinence. Makgalagadi N.people of the Kgalagadi area; people who speak Sekgalagadi.
makgalôê - OLL. the wait-a-bit thorn tree; the berries are edible and the leaves are used as medicine.
makgamatha - NOSING., dirt; filth.
makganatha - NO as makgamatha.
makgantsha - (same as "makgabe"), a girl's dress of strings; a woman's fringe worn in front of body to hide nakedness.
makgapha - ABs. N.CL.6 ma-, NOSING., used mainly.
makgaphê - different patterns used when smearing wet dung on a floor.
makgarapa - (same as "makgwarapana"), small stones; gravel; ground covered with small stones.
makgarebê - sometimes used of women just married; virgins; unmarried or recently married young women.
makgaritlha - NosinG., the dregs of beer, traditionally reserved for older men.
makgasa - tatters; ragged shreds of old garments, same as matanta, a ngwato, regiment.
makgathi - droves (of animals); swarms of locusts.
makgathikgathi - groups.
makgatlha - who show their wish to fight by throwing down a handful of earth.
makgatlhan6 - similar to dikgatlhd, intersections; crossroads.
makgawêkgawê - NOSING.,Same as makgêwêkgêwê, rugged, as jagged rocks.
makgêga - similar to makgago, which is frequently used, raggedness.
makgela - unripe fruit.
makgêmê - NosING., that which is watery; action of always flowing or running, as running eyes.
makgêthê - dexterity; skill.
makgêth6 - taxes.
makgethu - flints.
makgetl6 - occasions; numbers of times; opportunities.
makgoba - slaves; used less frequently to refer to coloured persons and members of the bastard tribes.
makgobê - dirty water of a pool.
makgobokgobo - a state of being muddy.
makgobolê - NOSING., belchings; that which is brought up by belching.
makgolo - hundreds.
makgomane - (same as "maraka and makaso"), species of gourds eaten when tender; dry gourds used for making calabashes.
makgomê - rarely used in the singular, filth; dirt; remains of food on a plate, lips, or hands, etc.
makgomoko - (same as "makgêmê"), which is frequently used, filth; dirt.
makgonatsotlhe - 1A9-, accomplish, and tsotlhe, all; a medicinal herb; a very powerful purgative; panacea; permanganate of potash.
makgopê - ¢-, siING. oF bomakgopê, same as metshwêêtshwêê, scab disease; the itch.
makgotla - councils; committees; associations, etc.; ID. EXPR, tlhaba makgotla, be restless; toss about, as one in pain.
makgotlwê - the horned owl. Makgowa N.Europeans; individuals with bodily features that are similar to those of Europeans. Origin of the word is uncertain: some people think it comes from gowa, shout, i.e. from the noise made by wagon drivers who first brought Europeans into the country; oral tradition also says that the word is spit, hence kgwiwa ke lewatlê.
makgowane - a species of eagle.
makgwafo - (same as "matshwafo"), which is less commonly used, lungs.
makgwakgwa - cartilages of the nose.
makgwara - difficulties; hardness.
makgwarapana - (same as "makgarapa"), small stones; gravel; ground covered with small stones.
makgwelekgwele - or long mounds.
makgwere - ™ma-, NOSING.,a State of confusion in the mind; problems; difficulties. ID. EXPR, go ja makgwere, to be confused or to have forgotten.
makhafe - fringes.
makhaha - many-celled and light in weight, as a honeycomb.
makhonkobe - ] colonial black workers.
makhubu - ridges; hills; waves.
makhue - (same as "diruwa and mankhua"), eggs left in a nest unhatched; eggs found outside the nest.
makhura - mucus. makhura (morenyana) N.(lorenyana), skin rash (miliaria).
makhwêkhwênênê - gonorrhoea.
makidiana - NO.
makikiana - large trees of a certain species.
makinitana - lazy people; shirkers.
makitlan6 - (arcu), a joint; a union.
makoa - ailments; weaknesses.
makobekobe - NOSING., similar to mekowakowa, which is more frequently used; a large quantity.
makobo - wild animals of a tiger-like species, probably extinct.
makôk6 - sects; companies; parties; coteries.:.
makêkôma - s. rough.
makôkôêma - packages; luggage, including goods brought home by a young man from work on the mines, etc.; packs carried on the back of a traveller.
makolane COLL - (same as "makolwane"), a thicket of palm trees.
makoloi - OLL. large numbers of wagons.
makololwane - storks; locust birds.
makolonkwane - a dwarf elephant; a species of small elephant.
makolwane - young | men; lusty youths; robust youths.
makôêmê - NO queen bee.
makôn6 - ends of something; joints; bowings or noddings of the head.
makopanêlê - joints; meeting places; sternum.
makôr6 - shape of horns that curve upwards, the tips tending backwards.
makêôtê - (same as "makwêtê and mangwêthê"), lumps of earth; sods.
makotlwê - ¢-, a horned owl.
maku - a species of thorn tree.
makubêlôê - NOSING. the last milk in a sack which only comes out after shaking.
makuka - pv.or lekuka, milk sack; sack traditionally made of thick hide in which fresh milk is poured daily for it to turn sour. makuku abv. ort. cockcrow; daybreak; very early dawn.
makukunopu - ridges; swellings with ridges between.
makula - Indians [borrowed].
makumaganyane - divisions; parties; smithereens.
makunantshana - NOSING., the remnant or residue of a people; a few people remaining after the greater part have left.
makurwane - 7d-, NOSING.,a species of long grass.
makwakwa - a stone of volcanic origin; stones with sharp edges; corn sprung from roots of a previous year's crop.
makwalakwatswane - NOSING., a motley of small writings or colours.
makwati - barks of trees. prov.dil6 makwati di kwatabolotswa mo go ba bangwe.
makwele - diaretapole potatoes.
makwelekwele - or barrows.
makwêtê - (same as "makêtê"), lump of soil.
makwetekwio - a species of Southern African partridge.
makwikeditshêg6 - No sING, roughness.
mala - and bola, bowels; intestines; gut; abdomen. 1. Exper, mala a mariga, cold weather.
malakabi - high flames; large flames.
malaôê - and bolad, beds; bedsteads; sleeping mats; sleeping place. 1p. EXPR, malao a tshwene, moving about in one's sleep.
malao - spices.
malapa - front enclosures of huts; families; residences.
malata - similar to batlhanka, serfs; underlings. ee.
malatlha - (same as "magala"), coal.
malatsi - days; doubtful that it also means suns.
malea - carded wool.
malebadi - NOSING., absentmindedness. prov., malebadi loso, a tshwana le ke gakilwe.
malebang DER - in line with; in connection with; according to.
malebêla - No SING, examples; samples; copies; models; 1p. ExPR, go tsaya malebêla to take an example from; to take something as a model.
malêbêlêbê - such and such places; bolêbêlêbê is presently used even where malêbêlêbê used to apply.
malebo - OLL. preferred to tebogê and ditebogê, particularly where large numbers of people are being addressed and where courteousness is being displayed; same as malebog6, thanks.
malebogôê - full form of malebo thanks; heartfelt thanks; gratitude.
malefu - (same as "dikodu which is in common use"), tonsils.
maleka - m@-, NOSING., equal; state in which two opponents, or opposing sides are evenly balanced.
malekeja - similar to makgasa and matanta, rags; tatters.
malekgololo - beads.
malelakokwane - 1A¢-, cry and kokwana, chick; kites or falcons.
malêlê - OLL. river, or sea weeds.
malele - which is only used when referring to a person; refuse; rubbish.
malêlêkatlou - lelêlêkatlou same as masonya, soldier ants; Matebele ants.
malem6 - (same as "bolemê"), which is commonly used, ploughings.
malengana - earrings.
malengwana - uvulars; epiglottises; also used to mean itoris.
maleo - sins; wrongdoings.
maletswa - NO mainly as REL. S., persuasiveness; mafoko a a maletswa, persuasive words.
maletswa - bird limes; mistletoe plants, or fruits. maldêba apv.ort.,a few days ago; a little while ago; not so long ago.
malêba a maabane abv - PHR, the day before yesterday.:.
malêbdlôb6 - NOSING. State of being drenched, or saturated.
malôk6 - cow-dung.
maloko - (same as "ditokololo"), members; associates.
malokololê - and lelokololê, joints of a limb.
malôl6 - DIAL. VAR. OF malele, which is more frequently used, garbage; refuse; also cattle that are thin, or poor in condition.
maloma - ¢-, same as malomê, which is more frequently used, maternal uncle.
malomaago - ¢-, your (singular) uncle.
malomaagwê - ¢-, his/her maternal uncle.
malomaatsônê - 1A¢-, the maternal uncles; their maternal uncles.
malomê - 14¢-,Same as maloma, maternal uncles.
malomêl6 - NO SING., place where the handle is put into the axe; tenon.
malommi - ¢-, a species of small dove.
malongwane - hard-hearted individual; treacherous person. Malope n.ancestor of the Bakwena, Bangwato and Bangwaketse.
malopê - duiker-bone in "ditaola", representing a messenger.
malosi - (same as "malotsi"), the remnants of a flock.
malotsi - (same as "malosi").
malwale - ¢., a single buffalo.
malwapa - front enclosures of huts; residences; families.
malwetsi - diseases; illnesses; venereal disease.
mamaisa - (same as "nenenketsa"), use a weak thing carefully.
mamalala - go quickly; go without stopping.
mamalalêla - go quickly.
mamalaletse - has gone quickly.
mamaleite - 1A¢-, N. bommaleite [Forj, marmalade.
mamaletse - has gone quickly, without stopping.
mamarêla - (same as "kgomarêla"), and ngaparêla, adhere to; stick to; cleave to.
mamaretse - has adhered to; has stuck to.
mamatlêla - or bind up a weak object.
mamatleletse - has repaired, or bound up, a weak or broken object.
mamatletse - has repaired or bound up, a weak or broken object. mamêla_v.s.sIMP.,same as namêla, ride; climb.
mamelemethe - knots; entanglements.
mamena - game pits; deep holes.
mametse - (same as "nametse has ridden"),; has climbed.
mamina - mucus from the nose.
mamipi - fat round intestines; omenta.
mamoso - oFT., early morning.
mampa - as in meruti e le mampa, or meruti e le mampa a kolobê, the shadows lengthen towards the east; the evening is drawing on. mampaakolobê apv. ort. early afternoon.
mampharing - species of agama lizard, not aggressive and yet poisonous.
mamphoro - fledglings; young birds.
mamphorwana - used more frequently than mamphoro, young birds.
mamponyemponye - /d-, dwarfs; pygmies.
mampu - salt licks. mana_vV.s.siMp., dry.
mana - No with larvae in it.
manageng - stools; faeces.
manama - ing on to, as a tick to a host.
maname - has clung to; is clinging to a host, as a parasite.
manameditse - has helped that which fails; has mended.
manasa S - rough, as porridge prepared from rough meal.
manath6 - (same as "mangathd"), marks in food where portion has been extracted, or broken off.
manatla - rarely used, powers.
manê - S.,QUAL. WORDS, CL.6 7a@-, ADJ. < manê, four. manê 1peo., of something getting stuck on to another.
manêêl6 - OFT., DER.F. nêêla, afternoon; time for giving young animals to their dams; the time for giving the she-goats their kids so they may suck.
manêga - fasten, or paste on; overlay; affix.
manêgêla - fasten, or paste on for.
manegile - has fastened, or pasted on.
manêgiwa - (same as "manegwa being fastened to"),; being overlaid.
manegolola - or unpaste.
manegolotsê - has unfastened, as that which was pasted on to something.
manemediwa - (same as "manemetswa"), being mended.
manemetsa - ameliorate; supply what is lacking; mend.
manênêke - used mainly as a REL.s. dangerous, as a path or precipice.
mang - ANDN.CL. 14o-, SING. OF bomang, who; o mang? who are you?.
mang mang - mang whosoever.
manga - particularly in the heel, noticeable especially in winter.
mangadingadi - fatigue; exhaustion.
mangami - stickiness.
mangamu -:rear lower part of bellies, above udders.
mangana - OLL. thickets of hookthorns.
mangana - areas behind the ears; mastoids; mumps; stubborn, or argumentative person; DEROGATORY EXPR. sel6 se mangana sika loo phagê.
mangana - traditional flute used by herdboys and young men, particularly those of a mophatd, or regiment.
manganga - NOSING., obstinancy; obduracy; arugmentation. Used mainly as a REL. motho yo o mangangna, argumentative person.
mangatana - beef steaks; fleshy pieces of meat cooked at the kgotla.
mangetengete - state of being dented or pierced all over.
mangau - leopards.
mangaung 10c - lit. place of the leopards; Bloemfontein.
mangodu - females of the blue tick; large bush lice.
mangolê - knees.
mangongobodi - silent people. 225.
mangopê - dongas; pits. prov. ga di ke di êtêlêlwa ke manamagadi pele, di ka wêla ka mangêpê.
mangope - lumps of porridge resulting from poor cooking; lumpy porridge.
mangwana - similar to maswabi, creases; wrinkles.
mangwatho - (same as "manatho"), fingermarks or toothmarks on food.
mankadile - A¢-, same as sekomporomae, a swing; a doll with swinging limbs [borrowed].
mankga - scents; perfumes.
mankgodi - ¢-, same as nkgodi, or mankgwedi, a village of that name is in the Kweneng district of Botswana; the black kite.
mankgolo - useless person.
mankgwedi - (same as "mankgodi").
mankopa - No SING, the loins, hence a short dress.
manku - OLL. many sheep; flocks of sheep.
mankwenyana - oracle-rod.
mankwitshipi - No loins; the back parts.
mannê - has dried; be dry.
mannê6 - vacancies.
manyêlo - rust; ore.
manok6 - ground nuts; peanuts.
manokonoko - NOSING., anguish; sorrow; sensation of heaviness, or weight; a tickling sensation.
manokwane - treacherous acts; deceitful ways; raids for stealing.
manologa - become loose or detached, as stones from a cliff, or a paper from a wall; arise; get up.
manologile - has become loose, or detached, as stones from a cliff or paper from a wall.
manolola - as an embedded stone; loosen; pull off, as paper from a wall.
manolotsê - has forced up, as a stone that is wedged tight.
manong - vultures; birds of prey.
manontlotlo - an impressive structure or suggestion; imaginative; art.
manotê - NO as of locusts cattle, 'ete.
mantaatshwene - valiant men; heroes in war, or hunt.
manthingwane - very fast.
mantlê - (same as "masepa faeces").
mantlele - siING. oF dimantlele (For). mantle.
mantlênyana - stools; faeces.
mantlo - (same as "matlo huts"),; houses.
mantlontlo - NOSING. similar to magasigasi, attractive things; beautiful things.
mantlopane - ¢-, same as nkopane, and silantopane, small black ant with a very painful bite.
mantona - and letona senior administrators; cabinet ministers.
mantsa - probably short form of mantsakabola, loose hanging things.
mantsabane - NOSING.,same aS matsabane, which is most frequently used, syphilis.
mantsaene - lizard.
mantsakabola - long narrow strip of material.
mantseboa - evening time.
mantsêtsê - (same as "matsêtsê"), nits, or eggs of lice and fleas.
mantsha - dry, or cause to dry.
mantshe - ¢-, an ostrich.
mantshitse - has caused to dry. mantsh6 1p. ExPR, meaning with a view to; in order that; and then.
mantshwekga - the sounds produced when fingers are snapped while stamping corn.
mantswe - voices; words.
mantswê - stones; hills; mountains.
manya - scallops; ornamental designs or walls. 1p. Expr, go ja manya, be troubled. 1p. ExPR, go jesa manya, persecute; worry or annoy.
manyakgomo - "yd, excrete, and kgomo, cow; black stones.
manyama - ™md-, NOSING. used mainly as REL. Ss. auspiciousness; luck; o manyama, you are auspicious.
manyamunyamu - (same as "manyemunyemu"), used mainly as a REL.s. very wet; saturated.
manyane - thousands.
manyaphiri - ver ¢. nya, excrete, and phiri, wolf; limestone.
manyatshipi - iron ore.
manyebe - NOSING., internal soreness of the body caused by a burden.
manyedi - otters.
manyediana - NOSING. Same as makidiane, which is more frequently used; mumps.
manyedinyedi - jewels; gems; the light of many fires.
manyeketshane - scallops joined together.
manyelele - ¢-, rheumatism.
manyêl6 - dross.
manyemunyemu - NOSING., used.
mainly as a - s, Same as manyamunyamu very wet; saturated.
manyena - (same as "mangena"), or mangenana, earrings.
manyêrê - NOSING., used mainly as a REL. S., the state of being overcooked, or too soft; pulpy.
manyêrênyêrê - NO mainly.
manyetenyete - serrated.
manydbênyôb6 - being topsy-turvy; confusion; state of being jumbled up; disorderly things; in a chaotic condition.
manyOdkênyôkê - winding.
maê - NOSING.,a woman's private parts (vulgar and insulting language).
maob6 - similar to megope, temporary, or makeshift shelter.
maodi - probably garbage; refuse.
maoka - OLL.a species of acacia karroo.
maokaoka - people in fancy dress to amuse; own.
maoma - secrets of initiation schools.
maona - ABS.N.CL.6 md-, NO SING. immaturity.
maonyana - OLL. a flock of lambs.
maota - a group of gardens.
maotlana - a dignitary's entourage.
maêtlhê - ver.r, dtlha wrinkles; curls; twirling things.
maotlholedi - sinc.or baatlholedi one who gives judgement.
maoto - legs; wheels, which are frequently called maotwana.
maoto-a-tshupa - a Slow-footed one, as a slow horse.
maotwana - wheels; supports of a roof of a Setswana hut, dug into the ground.
maowang - crested cranes.
mapa - (same as "akola and runa"), become fat, or stout.
mapak6 - poles.
mapalamê - ways of imbing; means of imbing. pRov.,tshwene e bonye mapalamê mafologê ya seka ya a bêna.
mapapa - (same as "mapopo"), corn withered by sun, or frost.
mapawa - (same as "mafawa"), steep iffs.
mapêkêpêkê - NOSING., similar to maphatsiphatsi, flashes of light; sparks.
mapele - genital organs.
mapetepete - onfusion; lumpy, as porridge.
maphaga - NOSING., tatters; ragged things; same as shape of horns that point sideways and then turn forward and in.
maphakêla - early morning; early mornings.
maphakwane - used mainly.
maphara - widths; being widely distended.
maphata - as branches.
maphatsiphatsi - things that glitter; luxurious and well-appointed places.
maphoi - doves; pigeons.
maphoko - NosiNG. similar to mafuld froth on ground caused by rain water.
maphotê - knots.
maphêtêphêtd - (same as "maphotêsêld"), cascades; waterfalls; cataracts.
maphêtêsêl6 - (same as "maphdtdphdtd"), cascades; waterfalls; cataracts.
maphurwana - quail.
maphutse - pumpkins. Maping N.waxbills.
mapom6 - pieces cut off.
mapono - the Matebele.
maponye - a male springbuck.
mapote - NOSING., mildew.
mapulane - (same as "matlalemetsi"), a species of bush; Blumea gariepina.
mara - bows.
mara - stain; bespatter; distort, or misrepresent words, or actions.
marabaraba - (same as "magabagakwe"), speckled things; varicoloured things; of various colours.
maradu - milk cows.
maraga - swamps; quagmires.
maragaraga - mixture of colours; disorderly, dirty things.
marag6 - the buttocks; the hinder parts; the base of a dish, pot, ete.
maraka - (same as "makaso and makgomane"), species of gourds eaten when tender.
maraka - many cattle posts; large herds of cattle.
marakanamantsi - the pancreas.
marakanêlê - meeting places; junctions; crossroads.
marakangwaga - @-, COLL. ground plants with edible red fruit.
marakantshane - a sp. of creeping plant with edible fruit.
marakê - ruins.
marama - also COLL. trees that are called morama, nuts of Tylosema esculenta.
marama - sunset.
maramara - be in want, or need of something.
marang - rays of light; brightness, as the rising or setting sun; radiance; effulgence.
marap6 - bones; used as a REL.S, it means strength; power, or forcefulness. O marapê, he is strong.
marara - riddle; complications, also.
maratagolejwa - view.
marathi - groups; droves.
maratla - noises.
maratê - love; liking; calf love; sensual love.
marêêlêlê - named after, as a person, or thing that is named after something; namesake.
mareetsane - 17a-, DER.F., reetsa, one who is fond of listening.
marekisetso - outlet for a chain of stores. 5.
marekisets6 - market.
marêla - similar to pharêla bespatter; throw mud at, or on; besmirch.
marele - (same as "dihutshane"), a mixed flock of sheep and goats. NB. the expression used when teasing someone, wa re marele a dinku tsoora mang?.
mareledi - slippery places; o setshêgê yo o oleng, mareledi a sa le pele.
marêmê - young animals at birth; young tender grass; used as a REL.s., it means forgetful.
marêmêla - (same as "dibêtlêla"), chips.
marêm6 - NOSING.,brake; marks where the wagon has been braked; much cutting, or hewing of trees.
marêrê - discharge at birth of young animals.
marêrêmêla - ots in gravy; curds of sour milk, etc.
marêtê - testicles.
maretlwa - OLL. Grevia flava; edible, wild grapes; 1D. ExPR., thupa tsa maretlwa, dark brown complexion.
marêt6 - NOSING., similar to dirêtê, a surname.
maretse - has bespattered; has thrown mud at, or on.
mariba - overhanging ledges; peaks of caps; shades of wagons; sunken eyes.
maribêla - No sina. similar to direpodi same as mokatakê, porch; veranda; stoep.
maribi - lumps of wet ay; dung, etc.
mariga - ADV. OFT.,NO SING., Winter; in winter. prov. khudu ya mariga e itsiwe ke mmei wa yonê.
marile - has bespattered; has thrown mud at, or on.
marinajwe - torn cuticles.
marinêpê - Nosin., the border of a garden.
marinini - (same as "mahinini"), gums.
mariri - ™a-, COLL. The use of the collective plural serves to bring out the meaning of hair that is big, ugly and.
marisO - (same as "maruswa"), a herbaceous plant with large watery edible roots, or bulbs.
maritsa - (same as "maritsê dregs"),; lees of beer, reserved for the oldest member of the group.
maritsa - residue.
maritshane - NO SING, a girl's covering of strings.
maritshe - a large wool grub; a hairy caterpillar.
maroana - OLL.PL, moroana, a species of mimosa trees. prov. phuduhudu e feta leroana, pounama di botlhoko.
maroba - holes; leaks in a vessel.
maroba - young cows, nearing maturity.
marobalê - sleeping places.
marobana - pores; small pitted scars.
marobôl6 - OLL. many guns; a variety of guns.
marofa - (same as "matshoba"), holes in a wall; open windows of a hut; holes; pores.
marôka - No used.
mainly as a - s. < monna o maroka, the man is a clever marksman, or shot.
maroku - (same as "marokhu"), gums, of trees; spices.
marôlê - weaned calves; also young calves; calves.
maronôpê - gleanings.
maronthorontho - pores; small scars caused by smallpox.
maroo - and leroo, same as matshoo, paws.
marêpane - (same as "marôêphane"), which is more commonly used, rogues; cheats; crooks.
marope - same as masope, deserted arable land; ruins. prov. maropeng go a boêlwa go sa boelweng ke teng.
marophi - (same as "masophi"), blisters.
marôp6 - heights; the Kaap plateau in Griqualand West and Southern Botswana.
maropogo - similar to makukunopu hard swellings on the skin.
marorodi - Nosinc.,embroidery.
marorongwane - ¢-, a cowardly person.
marêse - NO as makgasa, and matanta, tatters; very old, frayed garments; garments with many holes.
marose - or bunches of berries.
marota - oL.highlands; rising grounds, used as a REL-s. to signify hump-backed; stooping in gait; round shouldered.
marothd - loaves of bread; bread; buns, etc [borrowed].
marothodi - drops.
marotobo6 - sand dunes; ridgy country; undulating country; a country where ridge follows ridge.
marotsê - (same as "makatane"), melon; vegetable marrow.
maru - ouds; 1D. EXxPR maru a thibile.
marudi - (same as "magetla"), shoulders.
marukgwe - (same as "marokgwe"), trousers [borrowed].
marula - OLL.Sclerocarya caffra; flesh eaten when ripe; makes beer; nuts in kernel are edible; has many uses such as production of domestic utensils and as medicine.
marum6 - spears; bullets; shot.
maruôê - inherited things; possessions.
maruru - NOSING., winter ouds with cold, but no rain.
marurusa - swellings.
marutlwa - OLL. very many giraffes.
marwaka - (same as "marôka"), which is commonly used, marksman.
marwalêl6 - area below knees.
masa - dawn; of day; daylight; morning; towards morning.
masae - rattles on legs.
masafa - spendthrifts.
mašagarana - (same as "masagarana").
masagarana - (same as "mašagarana"), loose small stones, or gravel.
masai - fleas; eggs of fleas.
masaitseweng - $a itse, not know; mysteries; unknown things.
mašala - (same as "magala"), coals; coal; white socks, or large white stones.
masalêla - remnants; survivor.
masama - (same as "marama"), cheeks.
masari - ma@-, NOSING.,a large kaross of hartebeest skins. Masarwa N.bushmen of Botswana. Since the independence of the Republic of Botswana they are referred to in polite terms as Basarwa (PL) and Mosarwa (SING).
masasa - similar to matsatsa, light transparent things; flimsy things; a warren of squirrels, meercats, ete.
mašawe - thistles.
masê - refined grains of corn that has been ground, or stamped.
masea - infants; sucklings; babes.
masebasejwane - an individual who is fond of gossip.
masedi - lights.
maseg6 - beatitudes.
masêka - bangles; coiled spring; also used to refer to handcuffs.
maselamose - magic.
masêlamotlhaka - white-tailed mongooses.
masele - NO SING., Measles [borrowed].
masêlêlêa - a dance in which women wear jingling instruments made of the dry, empty cell cases of the khwena; ornaments.
mašêlêlêl6 - the naming of a person, or thing after another.
maselê - grammatical term meaning substantives.
masêl6 - round and flat winnowing baskets.
masêlwane - an illegitimate child.
masepa - (same as "mantlê"), faeces; excrement of human beings and of baboons.
masetatšhe - moustache. Masetedi N.same as Magerikwa, Griquas, especially those who were slaves during colonial times [borrowed].
ma§Setla - edible parts of bones; in the plural it also means force; strength.
masetlana - NOSING., distress; sorrow.
masetlêla - NOSING. pus with red blood; corpuscles still visible.
masêtlha - OLL. mimosa; confirmed thieves.
masetlhaoka - ™d@-, DIAL. VAR. OF masitaoka rarely used, harvester ants. i.
magi - ™a-, NOSING., DIAL. VAR. OF maswi milk; masi a lobese, fresh milk; masi a madila, sour milk.
masibi - the branding of cattle, etc. by nicking the ears; livestock branded by nicking the ears.
masiêla - orphans.
masika - family relations.
masilo - fools.
masimo - field; many fields; areas set aside for ploughing.
masinagoge - synagogues. Disinagoge is more frequently used [borrowed].
masinamêl6 - brims of basins.
masire - veils; wedding gowns.
masisi - ABS.N.CL.6 md-, NO SING., sensations caused by tickling; solemnity; awe; reverential fear.
masisi - shy; nervous; tingling; numbness; solemn.
masitaoka - harvester ants.
masitê - No bread of the honeycomb.
masitlha - or berries.
ma§goa - the noise of cheering crowds.
masogo - partridges.
masogodi - swarms of § | locusts; heavy showers of rain.
masogotlho - intertrigo; chafe.
masogwana - (same as "makawana"), lads.
masoke - Nopu.used mainly as a REL. s, recklessness; motho yo o masoke, a reckless person.
mašokgo - (same as "diphepheng"), black scorpions.
masokgola - toddlers.
masôlê - similar to batlhabani, soldiers; (ror, big calves about to wean.
masomê - tens.
masomê6 - crowds; groups of people.
masomoOsomo - ™ma-, NO crowds.
masore - @-, DIAL. VAR OF masori, which jg in common and popular use.
masori - (same as "ditlhdg6 gifts from a nephew toa maternal uncle ~"), usually in response to a gift first given by an uncle.
masošorôp6 - lean locusts; tree booters.
masula - evil; badness.
masuldê - (same as "mafulê foam"),; foam at the mouth.
mašumpu - ™a-, NO.
masusu - brand marks in the form of part of the ear nicked; nicked ears in calves whose mothers had calves that died one after the other.
masutê - little way.
masutlhasutlha - busy places.
maswa - inheritances; legacies; tumours.
maswaaeme - die and ema, stand; dead trees.
maswabi - ABS.N.,NO sugar cane, or sweet reed; wrinkles; disappointments; shame.
maswalê - good luck potions; preparations used for fumigating, or for offerings.
maswasupa - used mainly as a REL. S, emptiness.
maswaswa - strips of tobacco leaf cut up but not twisted.
maswat6 - NOSING.used mainly as a REL. S. laziness; o maswato, he is lazy.
maswê - filthiness; ugliness; nastiness; filth; dirt; faeces; stools.
maswêbêlêga - mercenaries.
maswele - (same as "matlhdlê"), ots of blood.
maswelwa - (same as "baswagadi and batlholagadi"), widows and widowers.
masweswele - ries and shouts.
matagwa - drunkards.
mataiseng - a place for playing dice.
matala - green; jaundiced.
matalanyane - German print oth.
matama - (same as "manama"), stick to; adhere to.
matame - has stuck to; has adhered to.
matam6 - dams; manmade ponds.
matane - to pay; wages; a species of wingless locust.
matanta - (same as "makgasa"), tatters; old, torn othes.
matapita - NosiNG. used mainly as a REL. SL., to signify besmirched with blood, mud, etc.
matarêla - (same as "matama"), adhere to; stick to.
mataretse - (same as "maname has adhered to"),; is adhering to.
matarisa - similar to matarêga, paste on to; cause a thing to adhere to another.
mateane - (same as "makanyane"), and matlhalerwa, wild dogs.
matedi - used mainly as a REL.S,a lewd person.
matêga - or smear.
matêgêla - be smeared, or stained.
matêgêlê - people of mixed race; bastard, especially from Western Cape and Namibia.
mategetse - is smeared, or stained; has become smeared.
mateng - NOSING., entrails of animals; contents; mysteries; deep things.
matêpê - hildish behaviour; naughtiness.
materêga - similar to matarisa, paste on to.
matha - ANDV.S. < ma-, spot; stain.
mathaithai - No things; puzzles; rumours from various quarters; unconfirmed stories.
mathamê - NOSING.,a very grave crime.
mathanye - have thrown dirt at one another.
mathata - difficulties; hardships; problems.
mathathapelo - heartbreaks.
mathatsane - lapwings. Mathe n.saliva. 1D. EXPR, go lela dikeledi tsa mathe, and go ja mathe a bankanaamotho. Mathêga v.s.simp.,similar to matêga, stick; plaster; smear with wet ay. Mathêka n.loins; waists; someone who is disproportionate by being small-waisted and broad-shouldered is referred to as mathêka.
mathekele - bundles of thatching grass; huts thatched with such bundles.
mathibêlêl6 - camping places; camps; outspans.
mathile - has thrown down wet things; has thrown at; as with clay, or mud.
mathoko - suburbs.
mathosi - dispersed.
mathubapula - soil that is yellowish in colour.
mathudi - NOSING.,same as maribêla verandahs; porticos; porches.
mathwalwane - foundlings.
matikiri - quarry.
matimêla - stray animals; lost cattle, sheep, goats, etc.; traditionally, if the owners were not traced, ownership was transferred to the ruler.
matipane - tip-truck [borrowed].
matla - prance as a horse, or shamble, as an ox; spread out evenly and paste on mud.
matladika - NOSING.,used mainly as a ReEL.s, filth in many spots.
matlaka - birds of prey; eagles.
matlakala - (same as "malele"), refuse; domestic rubbish; sweepings.
matlalê - skins; hides.
matlametlo - edible bullfrogs.
matlapa - stones; rocks; flat stones, or rocks that serve as natural receptacles for rain water.
matlaputlapu - NOSING., used mainly.
matlatla - that which springs up after last year's growth.
matlatsamadiri - auxiliary verbs.
matlawana - (same as "dibaga"), bead necklaces.
matlêkêtlêkê - No as at a feast; fulness, or plenty.
matletsetletse - NOSING., ¢lala great fulness; abundance, as provisions.
matlhadio - flesh parts of knuckles of meat.
matlhaga - useless things; irreparable things; wild, or alarming things, or news.
matlhagare - reaped cornfields; old cornfields.
matlhagasu - vehicles that are fit for a scrap heap; tattered things.
matlhagatlhaga ass - NO activity.
matlhajana - shelves.:.
matlhaje - (same as "matlhajwa"), a species of berry-yielding bush; Diospyros lycioides.
matlhakang - /a-, NOSING.,a mixed, or motley lot.
matlhakola - OLL. Euclea spp.
matlhakola - ma@-, NOSING., aremnant. 1p. exer, matlhakola a dipêpa, a bare remnant.
matlhaku - cut branches.
matlhakwana - pin. oF letlhaku, small cut branch; thorny cut bushes, or branches placed by a doctor to keep visitors away from a house where there is sickness.
matlhale - very ever people; cunning people; wily, or crafty persons.
matlhalerwa - (same as "mateane"), or makanyana, wild dogs.
matlhanamê - the layer of fat around the kidneys.
matlhanotlhano - No.
mainly as a - S, DER F. tlhanoga, change about; changeable; capricious.
matlhanya - (same as "setsend"), which is more commonly used, madmen; lunatics.
matlhaê - or dry cases of the khwena grub.
matlhapa - profanity; abuse; insults.
matlhape - OLL. a herd, or drove of cattle.
matlhapêlapula - small locust birds.
matlhapolane - dawning star.
matlhare - leaves; tea (leaves.).
matlhasedi - NOSING., sunbeams; pleasant atmosphere; dirty marks; stains on othes or the body.
matlhatlhagan6 - strata; layers.
matlhatlhaganyane - multistorey building(s).
matlhatlhapala - (same as "matlhatlharapa").
matlhatlharapa - (same as "ditlharapa"), dry twigs; small dry wood.
matlhatlharara - state of being untidy; being in a dishevelled and unkempt state.
matlhatsa - Ma@-, NOSING., vomit.
matlhatshane - a fibrous root used as soap; the leaves are used as a vegetable.
matlhats6 - Saturday the word comes from the idea of washing, one's othes prior to Sunday and the day before Sunday is Saturday.
matlhatswa - same a as matlhajwe, black root; blue bush; poison peach.
matlhau - (same as "ditlhafu"), shins (of a horse).
matlh6 - maitlhdê is stil] used in a few areas, eyes.
matlhê a diphina - eyes sore and black underneath, through constant discharge.
matlhoa - (same as "matlhad and matlhawa"), seed pods that are strung together and tied around ankles by traditional dancers.
matlhobole - similar to dikgdbê, a cooked mixture of beans and stamped maize.
matlhodi - lentils.
matlhogêla - offspring.
matlhdgolê - A9-, an unsuccessful person.
matlhêgonôl6 - blessings; favours; prosperity.
matlhokolotso - strips of meat for drying as biltong.
matlhokotlo - knots in a Stick.
matlhdêlê - pv.oF letlhdêlê, blood ots.
matlhomaganyane - small joinings in a kaross.
matlhomêla - children whose elder brothers or sisters have died.
matlhomola - No mainly as @ REL.S.OF @ NON-V. PRED.S, State(s) of pitiableness; pitiful things.
matlhononyôê - unfinished, or undressed materials.
matlhêtlhapelo - what makes one sad.
matlhotlhora - NOSING., similar to masalêla, crumbs, or scraps of food.
matlhwai - similar to ditlhodi, investigators; commissioners; war scouts.
matlhwana - pimM.oF matlhd, temples of the head.
matlhware - wild olive trees. matlhwêlê DIAL. var. or matlholê, which is more frequently used, blood ots.
matl6 - ABS.N.CL.6 ma-, DER. F. matla, prance.
matlo - (same as "mantlo huts"),; houses.
matlodi - potholes.
matloga - urticaria.
matlôk6 - selected articles; gathered articles.
matlolaganyôê - stepping stones.
matlolane - siING. oF bomatlolane, same as ntlole, a spring hare.
matlole - boxes; granaries; chests for treasures; organs (for making music).
matlêôm6 - aBs.N.CL.6 ma-, NO SING. Similar to mabela, a swaggering gait; a proud manner: haughtiness.
matlêtla - ruins.
matlêôtlê - finances; capital.
matlôtlôê - abundance; fulness; riches; wealth.
matlotlobo - similar to meitlobo, sloughed skins.
matobêtôbê - luxury; soft comfortable places, or things.
matokwane - DIAL. VAR. OF motokwane,_ which is more commonly used, the dagga plant; a species of Indian hemp.
matologa - become unpasted, unstuck or unfastened.
matologantsê - has separated; has pulled apart things pasted together.
matologanya - separate; pull apart; unpaste, unfasten, or unstick a thing that had adhered to another.
matologile - has become unpasted, unfastened, or unstuck after it had adhered to another.
matolola - (same as "matorolola"), unpaste, unfasten, or unstick a thing that had adhered to another.
matololêla - unpaste unfasten, or unstick a thing that had adhered to another for.
matololetse - has unpasted unfastened, or unstuck a thing that had adhered to another.
matolotsê - (same as "matorolotsê"), has unpasted; unfastened, or unstuck a thing that had adhered to another.
matonkomane - monkey nuts; peanuts.
matorolola - (same as "matolola"), unpaste, unfasten, or unstick a thing that had adhered to another.
matorolotsê - (same as "matolotsê"), has unpasted, unstuck, or unfastened a thing that had adhered to another.
matsabane - No siNG, syphilis (early stages of infection); same as thosala.
matsabatsaba - many coloured things.
matsadi - bruises; pains.
matsae - eggs of large birds, such as ostrich.
matsagale - grain growing in patches; a thicket with paths and glades.
matsala - DIAL. VAR. oF matsalê, which is more commonly used, a woman's parents-in-law.
matsalaago - 1As., your parents-in-law.
matsalaagwê - her parents-in-law.
matsalê - 1Ao-, a woman's parents-in-law.
matsank6 - wounds.
matsapa - ™ma-, weariness; fatigue; excessive tiredness; pains; hard work.
matsatsa - a warren of ground squirrels; meercats; a maze; labyrinth; complex network of underground paths.
matseba - rock pigeons; prudence; discretion; wariness.
matsela - oth.
matseto - gardens.
matsêtsê - or fleas.
matsêtsêlêk6 - No SING, skill; rcumspection; watchfulness; expertness in any craft; dexterity.
matsêtsênêkê - DIAL. VAR. OF matsêtsêlêk6, rcumspection.
matšha - dried-up salt lakes; -salt-pans; lakes.
matshamek6 - games; metshamekê is more frequently used; play-things.
matshebe - a fruitful land; a good country for pasture.
matshedis6 - NO SING, condolences.
matsheg6 - (same as "masêgd"), blessings; trivets, tripods.
matsheka - /a-, NosING. used mainly as an ADV. S., unwittingly.
matshêrê - NosiNG., the lochial discharge; watery motions mixed with blood.
matshêrêmêla - No siNG, very foul lochial discharge. ae.
matsheretshere - ™ma-, NOSING. similar to mamina, mucus.
matshêtshêth6 - NosiNG. bran from sifted meal; husks etc., from sifted grain.
matshitshi - banks of a river bed; brinks of a pool; beaches; brims of cups.
matshobane - ™a@-, NOSING. Same as matsobane, a rapid pace; a swift race.
matshoo - ™ma-, same as maroo, paws.
matshotsho - wingless insects.
matshutitshuti - which is rarely used, multitudes crowded together; crowds, or large groups of people.
matshwafo - (same as "makgwafo"), lungs.
matshwag6 - holes in the trunks of trees.
matshwaotemosi - distinctive markings.
matshwarwa - commonly referred to as ditshwarwa, captives.
matshweka - knock-knees.
matshwenyeg6 - NO troubles; worries; difficulties.
matshwititshwiti - large numbers.
matsibog6 - (same as "madibogê"), fords; drifts. Matsieng Nn. ¢-, an ancient mythical chief, a servant of ldwê; a national monument in the Kgatleng district.
matsitla - NOSING. stale, or badly prepared porridge.
matsitla - rushes.
mats6 - NOSING.,the end of confinement, traditionally accompanied by the doctoring of both mother and child and a feast.
matsobane - (same as "matshobane"), a swift race; a rapid race.
matsogê - health.
matsoketso - turnings; twistings; curves.
matsolo - air vents of anthills.
matsopetla - very muddy waters.
matsôêrôêtsôr6 - a downpour.
matsorwane - the portions of meat allotted to servants.
matsubutsubu - storms.
matswabudu - (same as "matlatla"), corn springing from last year's growth.
matswaketswake - NOSING., a jumble, or confused mess; a hodgepodge of food.
matswee - a mother in confinement; red buck.
matswêla - offshoots; offspring.
matswele - (same as "mabole"), fists.
matsweletsôkê - NosiNG., fraud; dishonesty.
matsweletswele - immense numbers; crowds of people.
matswetswen6 - 77@-, NO SING., sap of trees or grass; fat oozing from an unused cooking vessel.
matute - NOSING., juice; juice of fruit; nectar in a flower.
maudi - shreds from a woollen article; strands of hessian; hairs on the private parts of body.
maum6 - fruits of human birth; babies.
maungo - fruits; fruits of trees.
maungobolekane - anned fruit.
maupi - meal.
mautlwêlê-botlhoko - compassion; mercy.
mautsana - NO.
mauwe - mumps.
mawana - baobab trees.
mawanyana - ™da-, COLL. many lambs.
mawatlê - oceans; seas.
mawêlana - (same as "mafatlha"), twins.
mayO - departures.
mbamba - %-, home-made beer with a high alcohol content [borrowed].
me - s.,same as ka, my; mine; together with a poss. it makes a word, batho ba me, my people; selê sa me, my thing.
mealolêl6 - year-old calves.
mebala - colours. |.
mebele - bodies.
mebêlêgê - (same as "merwalê which is more commonly used"),. burdens; loads.
mebê6 - go ja mebêd, to exult; pleasures.
mebila - roads; streets; paths.
mebip6 - weals.
mebokôê - (same as "mekôo"), marrow in bones.
mebopê - bridges of noses; muzzles of animals.
mebu - soil; earth.
mebus6 - governments.
mebutla - hares.
medi - roots.
medibêla - to guard. Used in pur. ntlo ya medibêla, a house where there is a sick person, named from the custom of osing the gateway with a branch of thorn tree to forbid entrance; also refers to a female who is unwell or troubled with an issue, such as the necessity of protecting herself.
medidimo - (same as "tswii"), water lilies (edible).
mediêpê - NOSING., small pieces; tatters; rags. ID. EXPR, go ja mediêpê, to tear into rags.
medile - has germinated; has sprung up, as a sucker.
medilo - make sneering looks; to look askance at.
medimak6 - tall poles planted in the second initiation ceremony, coloured in black and white rings and ornamented at the top with tails of vet cats; something akin to the ashera of the Old Testament; come to be considered in modern times not merely as an emblem of diety, but diety itself; any upright poles or horns of animals.
medimo - gods; demigods.
medirê - feasts; ceremonies; ordinances.
medisa - cause to germinate.
medisitse - has caused to germinate.
medisitswe - has been caused to germinate.
medisiwa - being caused to germinate. Meditse v.s.pFr. < metsa, has swallowed.
meditswe - spp. of lizards.
meditswe - has been swallowed.
mediwa - (same as "metswa"), being swallowed.
meduba - species of trees growing on hills; Combretum zeyheri.
medubonoka - willow trees.
meduduets6 - ululations.
medum6 - noises; sounds; mutterings; complaints.
meduôlê - (same as "mmadiêl6"), a species of large hare.
medupe - rarely used in the sina, gentle rain; continual gentle rain.
meedi - watercourses; rivulets.
mêêmêê - 1D., of discussing in low tones or in secret.
meênênê - mirages.
meepeletsane - (same as "meepelwane"), triumphal songs, or shouts, of a returning army.
meepelwane - (same as "meepeletsane"), songs of triumph sung by returning army.
meêp6 - (same as "mekoti mines").
meêtsê - manes.
mefagê - and mfagê food for journeys; provisions.
mefajana - (same as "meritshana"), lids of pots.
mefal6 - (same as "dipakê"), skin water bags.
mefama - and mfama sides of a person, or animal; halves of slaughtered animals; sections, or parts of things.
mefapha - brows of hills.
mefatsa - (same as "diphatsa and dimapê"), spikes, or pointed Sticks.
mefeng - aXe, OF pick handles.
meferd - weeds.
mefinyana - more commonly used than mofeng, axe, or pick handles.
mefiri - large iron rings; prisoners' chains; handcuffs.
mefitshane - bracelets; rings.
mefol6 - medicine; poison.
mefu - red hornets.
mefubu - medicinal roots; navels; door handles (round type).
mefuta - kinds; varieties; types.
megabala - a species of creeping plant; bitter wild cucumber.
megala - lines; cords; ropes; telegrams; telephones.
megano - (same as "mesifa"), gristle.:.
meganê - times for ceasing, or recommencing work afterrain.
megatêld - heifer.
megatla - tails.
megetlo - sprouted corn meal boiled for making beer.
megobagoba - extremely large vehicles.
megodu - tripe; stomach.
megofu - species of long-horned rhinoceros.
megoga - meat of a cow, sheep, or goat eaten traditionally without salt at the burial of an adult.
megogoduma - unpleasant consequences.
megogoro - passes between hills; deep chasms between hills; passages; corridors; shrivelled-up hides or skins.
megola - (same as "mesipuri"), mhogele and morapa, crossbeams for hanging up bedding when not in use.
megolagang - small species of beetle.
megolokwane - ululation.
megoma - hoes.
megono - the back of the head or body. 1p. Expr, go ithwala megono, to put the hands at the back of the head when crying or.
megope - small huts.
megêp6 - ostrich egg shells.
megopo - wooden bowls; dishes; plates.
megopolê - thoughts; ideas.
megorêgôr6 - deep kloofs, or valleys; ravines.
megorogorwana - green monkey oranges.
megote - seldom used in the plural, heat; fevers.
megotlha - crushes or fenced passages with an entrance and an exit for handling cattle, etc.; traps.
megotlhê - camelthorns.
megwana - giant raisins.
megwang - etc., when young and green.
megwasa - (same as "mekgwasa"), rustling; sounds of shoes treadin.
megwele - night apes.
megwelegwele - Me@-, jays.
mehele - mountain req buck.
meila - taboos: things, or animals regarded as superstitious,; and hence avoided and not eaten.
meilolê - pungent medicines.
meithatis6 - love charms.
meitlam6 - girdles; waistbands.
meitlase - (same as "meitlamd"), which is more commonly used; girdles; waistbands, etc.
meja - end part of a blanket, or kaross.
mejaja - wild granadillas.
mejakê - doorways; first breastbones of a slaughtered sheep.
mej6 - a lot of food; a great variety of food.
mekabaowane - (same as "motswena"), klipspringers.
mekabi - Combretum; scrotal swellings.
mekadi - frontlets of shells.
mekaka - impudent cheeky people.
mekalata - asin the 1D. ExPR, go êma mekalata, to stand with the legs apart.
mekaloba - giants; strong men.
mekapana - Herero cucumbers.
mekaragana - frolickings; prancings.
mekata - red ay; soils.
mekatakôê - verandahs; porches.
mekate - wild melons.
mekawa - (same as "mekapana"), gherkins; wild cucumbers.
mekekolo - old people.
mekênt6 - same as meêntôê, injection; vaccination; innoculation [borrowed].
mekgabis6 - ornaments; decorations.
mekgab6 - fanciful othes; smart othes; attractive othes, or garments.
mekgal6 - Ziziphus mucronata.:.
mekgantitswe - ™me-, ordinary lizard; striped lizard.
mekgato - human milk.
mekgatšha - valleys; glades; dales. sande.
mekgêkgêth6 - one half of a carcass; fore-quarters of meat.
mekgeledi - ™me-, deep stripes, or scratches.
mekgobog6 - abrasions.
mekgokolosa - slopes.
mekgomphatha - wild raisin, Grewia flavescens.
mekgong - ™me-, same as digwapa, dried strips of meat; biltong.
mekgopha - aloes.
mekgorê - crosses; poles; huts; temporary huts.
mekgoronyane - Namaqua dove; bar-throated apalis.
mekgwa - habits; ways of behaving.
mekgwa - knobthorns.
mekgwasa - ™e-, same as megwasa, rustling; sounds of shoes treading.
mekgwatha - streets; avenues.
mekgwêba - red crested heathcock.
mekgwele6 - packs; burdens.
mekhasi - rushes.
mekhisa - stripes.
mekhukhu - shanties.
mek6 - (same as "memdkê bone-marrows").
mekoba - Acacia negriscens.
mekoduê - thin emaciated persons, or animals.
mekodumetsa - steep declines.
mekoko - cocks.
mekôkôtlêl6 - supplications.
mekôkôtlê - backs; spines.
mekôla - nose bleedings; epistaxis.
mekolane - (same as "mokolwane"), palm trees.
mekôlêla - (same as "mekwalêla"), spinal cords.
mekomakomane - light drizzle; very light rains.
mekomoto - roughleaved corkwood trees.
mekong - steep ascents. Mekôn6 n.cv.14¢-, siING. oF Bomekênd, same as Firikgong, January.
mekono - borders.
mekôrôê - canoes; boats.
mekêtla - backs; backbones.
mekôtla - sack.
mekowa - heaps; abundances.
mekowe - go-away birds.
mekubôê - mildew; mould.
mekukuthôê - the terminal bone of the spines of animals.
mekukutlwana - veins of a leaf.
mekwakwa - spineless monkey oranges; patches of ayey ground.
mekwatla - (same as "mekôtla"), backs; backbones.
mekwele - species of tree, Vitex zeyheri.
mekwêpa - black mambas.
mela - germinate; spring up.
melaetsa - messages; instructions.
melaka - discharge from eyes.
melaka - germinate well; spring up in large numbers.
melala - necks; lala palm.
melamu - knobkerries.
melaê - laws; rules; commandments, regulations.
melap6 - rivers.
melato - faults; debts.
melekê - trials and tribulations; impediments; hurdles.
melêla - root in; germinate for.
melelê - fires; cries, as of animals.
melelwane - (same as "melolwane"), borders; boundaries.
melem6 - drugs; medicines; kindnesses.
melete - pits; deep holes; hell.
meletlo - feasts; celebrations. PROv., ditsêbê di ja moletlo di sa o lalediwa.
melêtsa - girdles of beads; bits of ostrich shell.
meletsa - swallow for. 1D. ExPR meletsa mathe, desire to possess, or get at.
melê - offspring; a dance for two or more dancers.
melodi - whistles; tunes.
melomê - red locusts.
melomo - mouths; entrances to holes, etc.
melomogane - a species of marsh grass, similar to corn.
melope - widow birds.
melêra - ashes; soaps.
mema - swim.
mêma - Similar to Jaletsa, invite.
mêmaka - invite many; invite much.
mêmana - invite each other.
memeaka - smear much; deface much, or many.
memeêla - smear for; deface for.
memeêlêla - 1nT. < memeêla, smear intensively for.
memeeletse - has smeared intensively for.
memeetse - has defaced, or smeared for.
memeile - has smeared.
memeisitse - has caused, or helped to deface.
memeisitswe - has been caused, or helped to deface.
memeisiwa - (same as "memeiswa"), cause, or help to deface.
memeisiwa - being caused, or helped to deface.
memeiwa - being defaced.
memela - malt; sprouted corn.
mêmêla - invite to, or for.
mêmêlêlê s - superior; noble; privileged.
memena - skim; sift.
memenaka - skim, or sift much, or extensively.
memenêga - be skimmed, or sifted.
memenegile - has become skimmed.
memenêla - skim for.
memenetse - has skimmed for.
memennê - has skimmed.
memen6 - hems; folds in oth, ete.
memetlêla - repair, or bind up a weak or broken thing.
memetletse - (same as "mametletse"), has repaired, or bound up a weak or broken thing.
memets6 - throat; pharynx; oesophagus.
memeya - SMear; paint, in a careless or slap-dash manner.
memile - has invited.
memisa - cause, or help to invite.
memisitse - has caused, or helped to invite.
memisitswe - has been caused, or helped to invite.
memisiwa - being helped to invite.
mem6 - (same as "memêm6"), which is more frequently used; tibia; shin bones.
memôm6 - (same as "memo").
mena - make a hem.
menafune - rumours.
menagana - be folded; become folded.
menaganngwa - being wrapped together; being folded.
menagan6 - (same as "dikakany6"), thoughts; ideas.
menagantsê - has wrapped together.
menagantswê - ê, has been wrapped together.
menaganwa - being folded.
menaganya - wrap together; fold up, as bedding in the morning; putting things into a tidy heap.
menaganye - has become folded.
menala - abnormally long hoofs, or nails.
menam6 - runners; creepers (of plants).
menang - (same as "mentsana"), mosquitoes.
menangwane - details of a subject that is under discussion; ideas.
menantsitsi - tall and wiry.
menape - belts; waist thongs.
menate - sweetnesses; delicacies; dainties; enjoyment; entertainments.
menat6 - Burkea africana.
menegile - has become folded.
menêla - fold for; make a hem for.
menetse - has folded up, or down; has made a hem for.
mengala - lawless persons; domestic animals that resist being tamed.:.
mengana - ™me-, Acacia mellifera.
menganganyêgO - whooping cough.
mengatêg6 - a faint.
mengat6 - (same as "motsetd"), baby's napkins; loin skins.
mengob6 - dens; holes in iffs; lairs, etc.
mengobutsa - bones above the shins in an animal's legs.
mengoloi - paste made of locusts and berries.
mengop6 - large intestines; rectum.
mengot6 - DIAL. VAR. OF mengdpd rarely used, large intestines.
menisa - help to make a hem.
menisitse - has helped to fold; has helped to make a hem.
menisitswe - has been helped to make a hem.
menisiwa - being helped to fold; being helped to make a hem.
mennê - has folded; has made a hem.
mên6 - (same as "maind which is used in very few dialects"),; teeth.
meno - 1D., overturning suddenly; turning back, or over suddenly.
menoga - turn back, or to one side; turn around; overturn, or capsize; return.
menogana - turn upside down; double bend.
menogêla - turn back; turn aside; fall into; return.
menogetsa - Overturn.
menogetse - has turned back to; has turned aside to; has returned to.
menogile - has turned back, or aside; has overturned. menogwa vV.s.PAss. < menogiwa, being turned back.
menola - turn back, or over; cause to overturn.
menolala - unfold; unroll.
menolêla - turn under, as grass when soil is being ploughed.
menolotsê - has unfolded, or unrolled.
menopi - leeches.
menotê - feet of fowls.
menotsê - has turned back, or over.
mentsana - (same as "monang"), gnats; mosquitoes.
menwa - (same as "meniwa"), being folded.
menwana - fingers; toes; tips of hearts; penis, when referred to euphemistically, hence the 1p. ExPR, go gamola monwana, to urinate.
menya - EO., becoming bent, as when the chest is pressed out and the head bent backwards. menya vV.s.sIMp.,Same as nyenya, which is more commonly used; smile.
menyaga - round worms.
menyama - be, or become bent, as when the chest is pressed out and the head bent backwards.
menyame - has become bent as when the chest is pressed out and the head bent backwards.
medka - hives made underground by small black bees that do not sting; honey made by a type of black bee; small black honey-making bees.
meokodi - showers.
meopa - Sterile people; barren men.
meôpêlane - or songs of victory.
meotlo - anxiety; troubled thought; a custom; a tradition. mn. EXPR, go jewa ke meetlo.
meôêtlwane - or goats going out to graze before being milked.
medêtlwane - sticks for threshing. |.
mepakê - poles for osing gateways. |.
mepakwana - poles indicating that a mother in | confinement (motsetsi) is in the Lwapa.
mepeneweng - a species of berry bush; Cappea capensis.
mephakalêg6 - (same as "mophakarêgê"), crossbeams; crosspieces.
mephak6 - lintels. |.
mephakwana - pM. oF mephakê, cross poles; crossbars; lintels. 7 7.
mephatê - traditional regiments, each of which has a distinctive name given at the time of the initiation ceremony in which its members took part as initiates.
mephomê - flesh on the shoulder blades of persons.
mephuphutê - manners.
mephuthê - parcels.
mephutlê - weak wood, or rushes; papyri; river flags.
mepopotlo - weals; marks left on the body after a thrashing; smooth parts of animals' stomachs.
meraba - medicine bags.
merafe - communities; tribes; nations.
merafê - handfuls; mines.
meraga - swamps; bogs; mud that is suitable for making ay pots and other earthen utensils.
merago - stirrups.
meraka - cattle posts.
meraladi - newly married men.
meral6 - lines; furrows in a ploughed field.
merama - Tylosena esculonta, roots, tubers and beans are edible.
merapalalê - prostrations.
merapatse - logs of wood.
merapêlêl6 - intercessory prayers.
merapêl6 - prayers; prayer sessions.
merapôê - stems of legumes and melons.
merara - creeping plants; imbers, including Gymnema Sylvestre and Secamone parvifolia; when used.
merath6 - (same as "marogo"), bridges.
mere - flora; big trees; medicines.
mereba - sterile or barren animals.
merê6 - (same as "meraê"), potions used for putting on houses, as charm, etc.
merepO - small karosses.
merêr6 - affairs.
mereth6 - hammering; stresses, as in poetry.
merêt6 - pet names; names of endearment; praise poems; surnames; used as a REL.S, it signifies grained, as wood; striped, as mice; tortoiseshell; coloured, as a cat.
meretologa - (same as "diretologa"), sour plum; Ximenia caffra.
meriri - hair.
meriti - (same as "meruti shades"),; shadows.
meritshana - (same as "mefajana"), pot lids.
meroba - marriageable girls; heifers.
merobana - giants; strong men.
merobê - a species of edible berries; Ehretia spp.
merodi - (same as "dikgala"), dirty marks on the body.
merêg6 - vegetables; herbs; green stuff.
merola - the belladonna species of plants.
meropa - drums.
meropana - ™me-, timbrels; small drums.
merôr6 - snoring; moans. 1D. ExPR, go tshosa ka meroro.
merorodi - used mainly as a REL.s. multi coloured; colourful.
merubana - (same as "dikgamêlê"), milking vessels.
merubisi - owls.
meruthwane - hornets; wasps.
meruti - (same as "meriti shades"),; shadows.
merutlatshana - species of thorn trees that grow in arid regions; Acacia caffra.
merwalêla - floods.
merwalôê - including those that are carried on the head, etc.; a pregnancy.
mesak6 - large kraals; laagers.
mesam6 - pillows; cushions.
mesari - hartebeest skin karosses.
mesawa - sand on sea shore, or in river beds.
meselamotlhaka - meercats; also large black and white birds found in valleys.
mesêlê - water furrows; ditches.
mesêlêsêlê - sickle bushes; Dichrostachys nerea.
mesepele - walking; walking pace; journeys.
mesese - women's dresses; women's othes; skirts.
mesêtlha - Peltophorum africanum.
mesêtlh6 - (same as "ditshêtIhd"), ground creepers having yellow flowers and small sharp thorns; dubbeltjie thorns; marshmallow plants.
mesi - smoke.
mesidi - soot; powder off a pot; gunpowder.
mesifa - muscles; sinews.
mesikiri - (same as "metshikiri"), which is more frequently used; species of grass used for thatching and for making brooms.
mesima - or burrows in the ground.
mesipuri - (same as "megola"), and merapa, crossbeams for hanging bedding when not in use.
mesitlaphala - centipedes; a swarm of hopping locusts.
mesitlasitlwane - thistles.
mesito - prancing of horses.
mešopa - rolls of dried meat.
meswang - the contents of animal stomachs.
meswêswê - Swarms of small ants.
meteo - ridicule.
methaladi - or stripes.
methale - similar to merald, straight lines made on the ground; perpendicular stripes.
methale - different Sorts, or varieties; all kinds of things.
methalethale - No sinG.,all kinds, or varieties.
methekga - strips of skin hanging from men's waists.
methê6 - foundations.
methisa - stripes; weals.
methuthwa - moths.
metimêla - strayings.
metlaagana - temporary buildings; tabernacles.
metlang - commonly called metang, stalks, or bulbs.
metlha - times; periods; ages; eras.
metlhaba - sand.
metlhaka - stalk of corn; straw.
metlhala - footprints; spoors; also used to mean examples and ways of doing.
metlhana - backs; back part of carcasses; afterbirths; placentas.
metlhatlha - disagreeable people or unpleasant things.
metlhôb616k6 - large ant-hills.
metlhodi - eyes of fountains, or rivers.
metlhose - stalks of corn with no grain in them; bat-eared foxes.
metlhwa - white ants.
metlhwana - bundles of biltong.
metlôb6 - mines; pits; quarries; repositories for wealth, or valuable precious goods.
metlokolotso - (same as "metlhokolotso"), biltong; strips of raw hide.
metlopi - shepherds trees; Boscia albitrunca.
metlotsedi - labour pains; centres of pain; agony.
metloutlê - as made by anthills; obelisks.
metoroko - cactus.
metoutwane - eating moths.
metsa - swallow; swallow without chewing; devour, or eat.
metse - toropêd is more commonly used, villages; towns; homes. metsêga_v.s. NEUT, be palatable; be nice, or dainty in flavour.
metsegile - has gone down the throat.
metshe - me-, wooden pestles for stamping grain.
metshikiri - species of grass.
metshinyane - scars.
metshitsa -:same as methisa, stripes.
metshitshi - swarms of bees.
metshofê - (same as "motshopha"), spirals; curls.
metshêphê - spirals; curls.
metsi - days.
metsi - water; blood (poetic).
metsila - dividing lines or openings.
metsitla - species of flag plant growing in damp places; springs.
mets6 - units.
metsofe - ancient(s); old ones.
metsotso - minutes.
metswais6 - come out, and leiso, fireplace, partly burnt piece of firewood.
metswateng - come out, and feng, deep, the foetuses of dead animals.
metswatswa - snow white, or spotless.
metswedi - a fountain; a source; a spring.
metswi - arrows.
metswi - roots.
metswinekana - dirty marks.
meuane - mist.
meuba - bellows.
meup6 - medicinal charms to protect corn fields.
mewa - air; spirits; ghosts.
mewana - baobab trees.
mfama - half.
mfawa - (same as "mofawa"), a species of wild fig.
mhag6 - (same as "mofagê"), provision; food for the journey.
mhahu - a species of tree; Acacia fleckii.
mhaladi - (same as "mofaladi"), an exile; a refugee; one who has to leave home through some disaster that is natural or man-made.
mhama - (same as "letlhakore"), mfama, flank; side.
mhapha - (same as "mofapha"), hillside; brow of a hill.
mhapu - (same as "mofapu"), a species of hardy thorn; trees.
mhata - (same as "mofata"), a species of tree; Lonchocarpus nelsii.
mhatlha - (same as "mofatlha"), the salt bush, or the wild wool bush.
mhatolantswa - (same as "mohatolantswe"), a species of bush; Bequaert. dendron magalismontanum.
mhele - (same as "mofele"), mountain red buck; native chess game.
mherehere - (same as "moferefere"), confusion; chaos; a species of tree; Maytenus tennispina.
mhêrôê - (same as "mofêrêd"), weeds.
mhikêla - (same as "mofikêla"), common cold; a catarrhal cold.
mhikôê - (same as "mofikê"), a branch of thorn bush, or a set of poles placed at the entrance of a kraal to signify that the last member of the home has died.
mhikwana - branch in gate to show that people are out.
mhinyana - (same as "mofinyana"), and mofeng, an axe, or pick handle.
mhitshane - (same as "mohitshane"), a plain iron ring worn on the wrist, or the finger; a metal ornament worn on the body.
mhogole - (same as "morapa"), mogola and mosipuri, a horizontal bar on two upright poles to hang blankets over.
mhota - a species of evergreen tree; the raintree.
mina - similar to muna, blow the nose; drain food.
minaka - blow the nose.
minana - «Ec. blow each other's nose; clean each other's nose.
minêga - (same as "munêga"), be drainable.
minetse - has blown the nose at or to.
minnê - has blown the nose.
minola - ean the child and remove any mucus from the nose.
minologa - become drained.
minologile - has become drained.
minolosa - drain; pour out slowly so as to keep back sediment; drink the little quantity left.
minoloseditse - has drained for.
minoloseditswe - has been drained for.
minolosediwa - (same as "minolosetswa"), being drained for.
minolosetsa - drain for; pour slowly into. } minolositse v.s.PFT. < minolosa, has poured out | slowly, to keep back sediment.
minolositswe - has been poured out slowly, to keep back sediment.
minolosiwa - being poured | out slowly, to keep back sediment.
mintsha - cause, or help to blow the nose.
mitlwa - (same as "mmitlwa and mmutlwa"), thorn; spine.
mma - ¢-, woman; mother; mother to; may not be used instead of mosadi.
mma - commonly used with suBs. Moop + IMP. MooD, to signify, allow; permit; make it possible, as in mma ke utlwe, let me listen.
mmaabê - ¢-, their mother.
mmaagwê - his/her mother.
mmaakanyi - babaakanyi repairer.
mmaal6 - ¢-, its mother (used with nouns of s.s AND 11).
mmaanete - NOSING., same as nnefte and mmannete, truth; truths.
mmaa6 - ¢-, its mother (used with nouns of s.s AND 11).
mmaaso0 - ¢-, its mother (used with nouns of.
mmaba - an enemy; a foe.
mmaba - a species of tree, the leaves of which are used as a blood purifier; Securidaca longipduncalata.
mmaba - (PREF. mm-) mebaba, Buazi fibre tree; Passifloraceae. } mmabaoki Nn. ¢-, chief matron.
mmabatsane - ¢-, nettle.
mmabatshe - a species of shrub; Hibiscus micranthus.
mmabenyana - ommonly used as a REL. Ss, any abject thing; motho yo o } mmabenyana, an abject person.
mmabi - a species of wild cotton bush. Mmadi N.sinc.or babadi, a reader; a counter.
mmadisêfê - 1A¢-, police vehicle. (R.S.A. usage.) [borrowed].
mmiaele - mile [borrowed].
mmaeno - ¢-, same as mmago, your (plural) mother.
mmaetsh6 - ¢-, same as mmaarona, our mother.
mmago - your mother.
mmaka - must be followed by the thing praised; praiser of mmaka mogale, praiser of a hero.
mmakganatha - see makgonatsotlhe, a medicinal herb.
mmako - (pREF.thhogwana mm-) mebaka, water pear; Myrtaceace.
mmakomara - ¢-, rain god.
mmala - colour.
mmalabadi - a babbler; a chatterer.
mmalamadi - and madi, money, money counters; tellers.
mmalamatlôtlê - accountant. Mmaletlhakane Nn. ¢-, Randfontein.
mmalommi - ¢-, a species of dove with long tail.
mmalonakana - ¢-, green burweed.
mmamadikwadikwane - 1A¢-, a game in which a child spins round till she feels giddy; ballroom dancing.
mmamagotogotwane - 1Ag-, same as kgantlape, a species of agama lizard.
mmamagwai - (same as "kgantlape"), a species of agama lizard.
mmamathwane - ¢-, a bat.
mmamatlhwane - ¢-, mask. Mmamelodi n.cv.14¢-, siING.oF boMmamelodi, Paul Kruger; Pretoria. |.
mmammathi - ¢-, creeping insect; grasshopper. |.
mmammati - ¢-, a.
mmamodula - ¢-, stigma.
mmamogolo - a grandmother; my grandmother; a mother's | elder sister; my mother's elder sister.
mmamogwê - 1As-, badger.
mmamolangwana - ¢, — bommamolangwana, secretary bird.
mmamoso - oFT, same as maphakêla, early morning. Le.
mmampakisi - mask.
mmampamosidi - 14¢., same as mmampamotho, a diviner.
mmampamotho - 14¢-, same as mmampamosidi, a diviner.
mmanakalongwe - ™m0-, same as monakamongwe, a species of caterpillar with a horn-like shape at the tail.
mmanakê - ¢-, a star that rises early in the morning.
mmane - ¢, mother's younger sister.
mmangwana - ¢, mother; mother of babies. prov., mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka ko bogaleng.
mmangwane - ¢-, my aunt (maternal) who is younger than my mother.
mmankadile - ¢9-, siING. oF bommankadile top; wooden or metal toy.
mmankateng - panties.
mmapadi - (same as "mmapaledi"), merchant; trader; businessman.
mmapaile - 14¢-, little bird.
mmapaledi - babapaledi same as mmapadi, merchant.
mmapatsi - ™mo-, a merchant; a trader, same as mmapadi and mmapaledi. prov., mmapatsi phokwana, o tsamaya a ntshitse.
mmaraka - market [borrowed].
mmasa - a tree with a tanning bark hence dye.
mmasekgantshwane - 14¢-, something that one is very proud of.
mmaseleetswane - 1A¢-, praying mantis.
mmasepala - ¢,, a municipality; municipal council, offices, etc [borrowed].
mmasethufula - 149, bezuidenhout-pump.
mmatedi - a lewd person.
mmatli - seeker; searcher; an investigator. mme used mainly in the imp, similar to tsaya, take.
mimê - ¢9-, mother; my mother.
mme - but; however; and.
mmê - (same as "ntê"), and mma, signifies allow; permit; make it possible.
mmedi - siING.oF babedi, DER.F.ADJ.s bedi, state of being dual, used as a REL.s, or.
mmei-madi - treasurer.
mmeisane - opponent.
mmeiterone - matron [borrowed].
mmelaedi - a doubter; a complainant.
mmelafadi - a boaster; a proud person.
mmele - the body of a living person; the body of a vehicle, etc.
mmelegi - a nurse; one that carries a baby; a carrier.
mmelegisi - (same as "moelegisi"), a midwife; one who assists another to carry something on the back.
mmêlêg6 - a burden; that which is carried.
mmelegolodi - babelogolodi a remover of a burden; a reliever.
mmêl6 - a dance for two, or more persons.
mmêmogolo - sinc.or bommêmogolo grandmother; small black spots (moles).
mmêntlêlê - mantle; medal [borrowed].
mmeodi - a shearer; a haircutter; a barber.
mmereki - (For},a worker; an employee; a labourer.
mmê€rêk6 - a job; work; an employment; a task.
mmesi - ™mo-, a baker; one who grills, or roasts.
mmetli - a carpenter; a wood worker, etc.
mmidi - mealies; maize; euphemistic reference to the first teeth of a child.
mmila - a street; a path; a main road.
muilatsi - a devourer.
milê - a species of wild fruit tree; Vangueria infauta.
mmilêgotswana - m0-, a species of Vangueria infauta, believed to cause headaches if eaten.
mmina - mo-, venerator of, as in mmina phuti, venerator of a duiker; a title put before the totem of the tribe in addressing a member of that particular tribe; mmina kwena, man of the crocodile; lit. dancer of the crocodile.
mmini - sinc.or babini, a dancer.
mminôê - (mebind) dance. Mmirwa N.sinG.or Babirwa, a member of the Birwa tribe.
mmitiafanitšhara - mend, fanitshara, furniture.
mmitiedi - similar to mmolai, an assassin; a murderer.
mmitli - one who rubs his eyes.
mmitlwa - (same as "mutlwa and mmutlwa"), thorn; spine.
mmitsa - ™mo-, charm that attracts customers; a charm that attracts men; a prostitute.
mmitsi - a caller.
mmobodi - a sick person.
mmodi - a teller of news.
mmodufadi - babodufadi a lazy person; a sluggard.
mmodula - the flower on a corn Stalk; the outer and loose husk that ings to corn.
mmogedi - spectator.
mmêg6 - together.
mmoi - (same as "leboi"), which is more commonly used, a coward; a timid person.
mmoki - sinc.or baboki, pver.F. boka a poet; a praise poet.
mmoko - fine chaff that causes itching; chaff.
mmokwana - (same as "mebokwane"), measles; also euphemistically called swampane, in parts of the RSA.
mmola - a species of acacia, the root of which has medicinal qualities; dwarf; sand apple; Chrysobalanaceae (Parihari capensis); a ditch.
mmolai - a killer; a murderer.
mmoledi - one who tells; a reporter; a narrator.
mmolêl6 - sentence.
mmoloki - sinc.or baboloki, a saviour; the saviour; Christians refer to Jesus Christ as mmoloki.
mmolopita - sinc.or mebolopita, a can.
mmênyana - similar to serêka, a species of tree that grows in sandy places, the sweet roots of which are chewed by people; Commiphora species.
mmopa - siING.oF mebopa, ay that is used for moulding pots, cups, ete.
mmopamo - famine; starvation; emaciation; thinness.:.
mmopi - a creator; the creator; a maker; a moulder; a potter. MMoOpo N.commonly used by Kgatla, DIAL. var, to refer to maize, or corn.
mmêôp6 - the muzzle of an animal.
mmêtlana - young one, only used to refer to people; junior.
mmôtlwane - (same as "mohubu"), or khubu, the navel.
mmôtê - ridge.
mmoto - the part below the anus.
mmotêrê - m0-, a species of moth very destructive to hair and wool; a motor [borrowed].
mmotorokara - Same as sejanaga motorokara, motorcar [borrowed].
mmotwana - a boundary; a limit.
mmoul6 - same as mmoulwê, a mule; hybrid grain [borrowed].
mmu - M0-, soil; earth; wasp; hornet.
mmududu - ¢-, greyhaired.
mmueledi - defence counsel; intercessor; legal practitioner.
mmui - a speaker.
mmui moeteledipele - babui baeteledipele, Speaker in Parliament.
mmuladitsela - ioneer. On N.feather palm; wild date palm; dwarf date palm; Arecaleae.
mmuru - a bolt; a nut; coffee grounds [borrowed].
mmusi - a ruler; a governor.
mmus6 - a government.
mmusolosi - /0-, an avenger.
mmutlwa - (same as "mitlwa and mmitlwa"), thorn; spine. mo CL.10BJ.c. < 0amo utlwa, he hears him [lit. he him hears]. moO CL.1PREF. < monnd, man; mosadi, woman; it is used to make verb stems and those of other parts of speech into, cL.ins < mo + aga = moagi, a builder; mo + ntsho = montsho, the black one; mo + thata mothati, the powerful one. MO DEMONS. QUAL. CLS.15 + 17,it is; DIAL. VAR. OF go; go tsamaya mo, this travelling; go tsamaya gole, that yonder in terms of time travelling.
moO - ADV. PL.,in; among. NB. serves a purpose, similar to that of prepositions in languages like English.
moabedwi - lit. means one who is given; a sharer; a partaker.
moabi - a giver; an allotter; a divider.
moabula - used mainly as a REL.s state of being wide; tsela ya moabula, a wide path.
moadimi - a lender; a borrower.
moadingwi - one who borrows, or lends.
moagelani - a neighbour.
moagi - ™0-, a builder; a building contractor; a constructor; a dweller.
moag6 - 0-, the way of building; building style.
moagontlhêmê - (same as "mokgoroikagê"), a prefabricated building.
moakafadi - (same as "seaka"), adulterer.
moakanyetsi - ™m0-, a designer.
moaki - sinNG.oF baaki, a liar.
moalafi - a healer; a doctor.
moalogi - graduate.
moalolêl6 - a newly weaned calf.
moama - M0, red leaved rock fig-tree; Moroceae.
moamusi - M0-, one who gives suck; feeding mother. -.
moana - M0-, a baobab tree.
moano - motto.
moany6 - a fat one, as a child, or calf (lit. a wellfed suckling).
moapar6 - fashion.
moapeêi - a cook.
moaposetêla - (same as "moaposetoloi"), which is less frequently used [rorj,an apostle.
moarasope - ™mo-, spread and sope, ruin, a tree bearing edible fruit.
moatlhodi - sinc.or baatlhodi, vER.r. atlhola, a judge; an arbitrator.
mobeane - m0-, same as molebatsi and moyoani, live-long bush.
mobip6 - a weal. a swelling in which there is no fluid; or pus under the skin.
mobišôp6 - bobisdpê, a bishop [borrowed].
mobišôp6 mogolo - bagolo (ror), archbishop.
modi - (same as "motswi a root"),; cords forming the upper garment of a girl going through the puberty initiation ceremony.
modibedi - sinc.or badibedi, a keeper of valuables; a common water lily.
modibedi - watchman.
modibê - sinc.or medibê, same as modubo, and modibonoka, willow.
modibonoka - medibonoka same as modubo, and modibo, willow; weeping willow.
modidima - (same as "tswii"), water lily, the bulbs of which are edible.
modiga - an end of a dispute, or discourse. 1p. ExPR, ae nê modiga.
modiidi - a sufferer; a poor person.
modikanê - a boisterous game played by young men, or women.
modik6 - as an army, or town; an encirclement; similar to theko and thekeletso.
modikologa - medikologa a slow one. PRov., lepotlapotla le jele pholwana, modikologa o jele pholo ya tona, nowadays also means a rcle; a cul-de-sac; a rcuitous way.
modila - a snake's tracks, or trail.
modilla - wild cotton.
modilo - askance look; suspicious view.
modilodi - spotted; used mainly as a RELS.
modimakê - a pole erected at the second initiation ceremony of males, probably akin to the ashera of early Old Testament days; it is said it represents that which excels any created thing; an upward-pointing thing, as the horns of an eland. Same as monyêlwa ke kgomo. Modimo Nn.Nop, God. prov., Modimo ga o je nkabo; go bisa go bitsa motho go bitsa Modimo; Modimo o rata leritê.
modimo - a demigod. Modimo o tshwarê N.PHR, God is gracious.
modingwana - small boil; haemorrhoid.
modipa - a domineering person; an upstart; usurper.
modip66 - (same as "tlhabatshe or moditona"), taproot.
modirabosula - badirabosula do and bosula, evil; a worker of evil; an evil doer.
modirakadiatla - artisan.
modiramere - and mere, medicines; a medicine maker.
modirametlae - own.
modiredi - sinc.or badiredi, a helper; a servant; a minister; nowadays it refers more to an employee; a worker, including office personnel.
modiri - doer. prov., modirwa ga a lebale, go lebala modiri.
modirisapharatšhutu - (ror), parachutist.
modirisêtaêl6 - imperative (mood).
modirê - a feast; a function; an affair; a ceremony; a concern.
modirê wa tlolaganyôê - (same as "paseka feast of the passover").
modisa - a shepherd; a herdboy.
moditona - (same as "tlhabatshe or modipôê"), taproot.
moditswe - a species of black lizard.
moduba - a species of tree growing on hills; Combretum zeyheri.
modube - sinc.or medube, strife; turmoil.
modubê - dough.
modubu - lochia; discharge from an animal in season.
moduduetso - applause; ululating; of a woman in a dance; yodelling, of a girl, or woman.
moduedi - a rewarder; one who pays.
moduka - a hedge.
moduku - a stockade of poles enclosing a village.
moduku - backyard.
modulasetilo - sinc.or badulasetilo chairman.
modumedi - a believer; a Christian.
modumêla - a species of acacia tree.
modum6 - sounds; noise; a rumour.
modumologi - one who has ceased to believe; unbeliever.
moduôl6 - a large blackish hare.
modupaphiri - sinc.or medupaphiri, a species of tree; Rhus tenuinervis.
modupe - gentle soaking rain; gentle rain not accompanied by thunder and lighting.
modupi - a water diviner; a traditional doctor who draws blood surgically.
modup6 - odour.
modutu - a species of white-wood tree; Celtis africana.
modutwana - a leather bottle; a calabash.
moedi - a water course; rivulet. Moeding N.¢-, the name of a college some kilometres south of Lobatse. It was given the name of the nowdefunct Tigerkloof Institute. Tradition has it that the name was suggested by Rev. A. Kgasa, and unanimously approved by the board in the early 1960s.
moêkê - gift of meat from a son-in-law.:.
moelamedi - a succourer.
moeledi - a navel cord.
moelegisi - /0-, same as mmelegisi, which is more commonly used; a midwife.
moêlêla - the state of having a calf, or child every year.
moêmakgatlhanong - m0-, opponent.
moêmanosi - independent candidate.
moeme - M0-, erect pointing, or erect thing; a name sometimes given to a modimako, or tall pole with black and white stripes, and crowned with vet cat tail that stands in the centre of the Bogwêra camp at the second initiation.
moemedi - ™mo-, ambassador; representative.
moênênê - a mirage.
moeng - ANDN.N.CL.1 /0-, SING. OF baeng determine the sex of a child?.
moeng - M0-, 14¢, and bomoeng, a visitor; a guest; a college situated some kilometers east of Palapye as a selfhelp project built by the Bangwato regiments during the reign of Tshekedi Khama in the 1950s. PRovs., moeng ga a dibedi, and moeng goroga dijê di bênalê.
moengele - an angel [borrowed].
moenjenere - ™mo0-, engineer [borrowed].
moenyana - M0-, a stranger; a traveller. prov. moenyana o pele bênê lwa wabê.
moêpakhuti - and khuti, hole; a solitary male hartebeest.
moêpelwane - traditional rejoicing of dance, song and ululation in a community, after some achievement such as defeat of an enemy.
moepi - ™mo0-, a digger.
moêp6 - (same as "mokoti and mmaene"), a neologism; a mine.
mo€êrêg6 - an easygoing person; a credulous, or gullible person.
moêta - a big earthen beer vessel.
moeteledipele - ™mo-, lead, and pele, before; a leader; a forerunner.
moethimol6 - sneeze.
moeti - ™mo0-, a traveller; a visitor.
moêtsana - bridesmaid; groom's man; best man.
moêtsê - mane; fin (of fish).
moetsi - (same as "ngwetsi which is commonly used"), daughter-in-law.
mofafa - (same as "mhaha"), a species of grass.
mofafamog6 - a convulsion.
mofag6 - (same as "mhagê"), food for a journey; provisions.
mofajana - (same as "moritshana"), a lid of an iron pot.
mofaladi - (same as "mhaladi"), an exile; a refugee.
mofalatsamaru - ™0-, scatter, and maru, ouds; species of asparagus, believed to have power of scattering rain ouds.
mofal6 - a small skin water-bag.
mofama - (same as "mhama"), the side of a person; the half of an animal cut off at the backbone; mofama o mogolo, the greater half including the backbone.
mofana - a thick stick, or pole, pointed for making holes; a crowbar; a coulter of a plough.
mofapha - (same as "mhapha"), the side of a hill; the slope just before the peak of a hill.
mofapu - (same as "mhapu"), a species of hardy thorn.
mofarasai - a pharisee [borrowed].
mofata - (same as "mhata"), a species of tree which grows in heavy sand; Lonchocarpus nelsii.
mofatlha - (same as "mhatlha"), the salt-bush, or the wild wool bush.
mofatsa - similar to phatsa, a spike; a pointed stake in a game pit.
mofawa - (same as "mhawa"), a species of wild fig.
mofeie - m0-, fig [borrowed].
mofelepe - a traditionally foolish man; a childish person.
mofemedi - defender; protector.
mofeng - (same as "mofinyana"), a handle, as that of an axe, or pick.
mofenyi - a conqueror; a victor.
mofêrê - ™mo-, same as mhêrê, a weed of any species.
moferu - m0-, same as mhêru, used mainly as a REL.s, wide, of a path; tsela e moferu, a wide path.
mofetodi - ™mo-, same as mhetodi, one who replies; a respondent.
mofetola - a shrub used for tanning purposes, Indigofera cryptantha; given to ewes to cause them to lamb and in childbirth to assist delivery; also used traditionally to hasten the ripening of crops.
mofetoledi - a translator; one who answers on behalf of another.
mofikapitse - a species of creeping plant, the roots of which, when boiled, are said to be a cure for headache.
mofikêla - (same as "mhikêla"), common cold; a catarrhal cold.
mofikwana - DIM. or mofikê, a pole, stick, or bush placed at the door of the hut of a sick person, or that of a woman who is confined, to forbid the entrance of visitors.
mofina - same as beina and waene, wine; vine [borrowed].
mofinyana - an axe, or pickhandle.
mofitshana - (same as "mhitshana"), a plain iron ring worn on the wrist, or on the finger; a metal ornament worn on the body.
mofitshwana - species of tree.
mofofolêla - (same as "mhoholêla"), a rain, blown towards one by a draught of wind; light drizzle.
mofofu - a troop of eland.
mofoka - sinc.or mefoka, wild grain of any variety; tares.
mofôk6 - a praiseworthy person.
mofokwê - DIAL. VAR. oF mofêkê, a praiseworthy person.
mofolêfolê - t.3 mo-, a lull in the wind; stillness, after, or just before a storm; silence.
mofôl6 - parade.
mofolê - medicine; poison.
mofololo - used mainly as.a RELŠs nakedness; indecent exposure.
mofotlha - a species of bush.
mofotshwa - a species of edible berry.
mofudi - one who shoots; an archer; a marksman.
mofudufudu - a species of short red grass.
mofufutsôê - perspiration; sweat. 1D. ExPR, go ja mofufutsd wa phatla.
mofukubu - DIAL VAR OF lefukubu a raven; a black crow.
mofula - (same as "mhula"), a female servant; a handmaid.
mofupolodi - sinc.or bafupolodi, one who gives breathing time; a Test-giver.
mofuta - a kind; a variety; a species; a sort.
mogabaditsana - a species of plant that bears edible berries.
mogabala - bitter wild cucumber.
mogabi - an engraver.
mogabê - a stone engraving.
mogadika - (same as "mogadikani"), a rival husband, or wife; mother-in-law; daughter-in-law.
mogadikae - (same as "mogadikane"), but hardly used, his, or her rival.
mogadikane - (same as "mogadika"), also means a troublesome, or annoying person.
mogadikêg6 - a stomach ache.
mogadingwana - a junior wife; a concubine, not applied to a chief's wife.
mogaeno - your relative; your tribesman.
mogaga - species of bush, believed to have power over rain.
mogagab6 - his/her relative; his/her tribesman; a neighbour; brother, or sister in the general sense of the human family.
mogagapi - an extortioner; an usurer.
mogagaru - MO0-, greed; greediness.
mogagolwane - M0-, similar to tšhale, shawl.
mogaisanyi - contestant.
mogaka - bravest; champion.
mogakabe - (same as "legakabe"), which is more frequently used, a pied crow.
mogakangwaga - (same as "thakangwaga"), the name derived from fact that it ripens early; a species of ground plants with edible fruits used for brewing khadi.
mogakolodi - pvEr. F. gakolola, an adviser; a counsellor; one who reminds.
mogala - a cord; a rope; a line or wire; a telephone; a telegram.
mogalagare - diameter.
mogalammakapa - PR, my word; good heavens. vB, In the Batlhaping tribe only people who had been circumcised could exclaim in this way.
mogale - hero; heroine; a brave person.
mogale - 14¢-, whitebrowed sparrow or weaver.
mogalona - your tribal brother, or neighbour.
mogamane - Kalahari food berry; Fabaceae.
mogami - as gama, a milker.
mogamutlhe - a thing, or person with a small waist.
moganetsi - §anetsa, an opponent; an adversary; one who disapproves.
mogang - OFT.,same as motlha, at the time when; when.
mogani - an objector; a rejector.
mogan6 - a breaking up, or cessation of rain; time for resuming work after rain.
mogapa - empty eye socket; an eyeless person.
mogapaesi - oneeyed person.
mogarafatshe - equator.
mogare - rarely used in the singular; germ; virus; small worm.
mogarugaru - a species of river grass.
mogaswana - leather trousers.
mogata - m0-, same as mofata, or mopandapanda, or mopororo, raintree.
mogatêl6 - a heifer about two years old, ready to conceive for the first time.
mogatisi - printer; publisher.
mogatla - tail.
mogatlana - suffix.
mogatê - charcoal from roots for medicinal purposes.
mogatsa - ¢, the Spouse of; it must be followed by the name of the spouse, hence mogatsa mang mang, so and so's husband, or wife.
mogatsaagwê - less frequently used than mogatsê.
mogatsaka - ¢-, or bagatsaka, my husband, or my wife.
mogatsakê - my wife/husband (speaking about him/her).
mogatsê - his wife; her husband.
mogatswe - mo0-, wild coffee bean; Fabaceae.
mogatšwi - (same as "mogapiwa"), mogolêgwa and legolêgwa, a captive.
mogau - poison; a very poisonous bulb; a small bush very poisonous to animals. mogege 1D., white; lily-white.
mogetlo - the porridge-like stuff to which water and malt are added in beer brewing.
mogoafatshe - similar to mogope, a temporary shelter, or hut of a conical shape made of branches.
mogobagobetsi - a taskmaster; one who causes another to hurry.
mogobe - a pool of rain water.
mogobodi - a straight burrow.
mogodi - a senior; an elderly one.
mogodiri - Rhus Pyroides; a tree with heavy long spines, bearing small fruit. Mogoditshane n.a village six km west of Gaborone.
mogodu - stomach. PROV., go tswa ka letshoba la mogodu.
mogofu - a big rhinoceros.
mogoga - M0-, a COW, or an ox that is specially slaughtered on the death of an adult member of a community. NB. traditionally, the meat was cooked and eaten unseasoned; it was taboo to take any such meat out of the home of the bereaved; in some communities, the killing could be done months after the burial, in which case beer was also brewed for the occasion.
mogogabanyana - and banyana, infants; a tutor; youth leader.
mogogaie - similar to segogou; a very old person.
mogogatau - ™m0-, a species of acacia; Acacia ataxacantha.
mogogi - ™m0-, a leader; a guide; one who leads a blind person with a stick.
mogogo - M0-, a bush with tender stems, edible black fruit and sweet to the taste.
mogogolope - a speaker.
mogêgêrêlê - a sheath for a spear.
mogogord - a kloof having no outlet; a tunnel; a ravine; a passage.
mogogoro - similar to sekoloa, an unbrayed and shrivelled skin.
mogogorwana - /0-, a dummy calf made of skin, stuffed with grass; a dummy calf that is licked by a lactating cow whose own calf has died.
mogogwadi - (same as "mogwagadi"), a male parent-in-law; any inlaw, excluding only the bride, who is referred to as ngwetsi.
mogogwadiagwê - his in-law.
mogokafadi - bagokafadi a fornicator; an adulterer; or adulteress.
mogokane - a woman's brother's wife; a woman's sišter-inlaw.
mogokang - a hooked thorn bush that grows in sandy places.
mogokanya COLL. PL - 0-, a flock of kgokonyana, birds.
mogokao - sinc.or bomogokao brother's wife, spoken to a woman; sister-inlaw. Mogokare Nn. A¢-, the Caledon River in the R.S.A.
mogokêl6 - siNc.or megokêlê, manner of trying.
mogokgo - leader; superintendent; principal.
mogokong - young locusts in the stage prior to flying, and when they have changed in colour from black to red.
mogokotlou - a very tall, stout person.
mogokou - M0-, DIAL. VAR. OF mogokao brother's wife, spoken to a woman; sister-inlaw.
mogola - (same as "mosipuri"), morapa and mhagolê, a crossbeam on which to hang bedding when not in use.
mogola - (same as "legola"), which is more commonly used, a harvested garden.
mogolabosigo - datura; a Stramonium plant.
mogolagang - a species of small corn-eating beetle; a small bush with many intertwined branches; a very poisonous bulb.
mogolasets6 - and setsd, of a kind; a hooked stick for holding an ox by the cord in its nose.
mogoledi - a woman approaching child-birth.
mogolêgwa - (same as "legolêgwa"), which is more commonly used, also same as mogatswi, a captive; a prisoner.
mogolegwê - a species of small bird.
mogolegwi - m0-, same as legolêgwa, a prisoner.
mogolo - an elderly person; a senior; an adult. 1p. Expr. motho wa mogolo, a wretched person; a poor man; an unlucky man.
mogolodi - a deliverer; one who outspans cattle.
mogolodi - (same as "mogolori"), a blue crane.
mogolokwane - ululation.
mogolole - ™0-, AND 1Ao-, and bomogolole, my elder; my elder sibling.
mogolo6 - your elder; your elder brother/sister.
mogolori - (same as "mogolodi"), a blue crane.
mogolowê - 1A9-, his/her elder brother, or sister.
mogolwane - a superior person; one high in rank; an elder; a councillor.
mogêma - a domineering person; a despot.
mogoma - ™0-, a plough; a hoe.
mogomotsi - a comforter.
mogonôên6 - a tree with a whitish bark and silvery leaves; Terminalia sericea, found mainly in sandy areas.
mogontlho - act of taking advantage of another.
mogope - similar to leôb6, small hut, the rough hewn type used in the fields and cattle posts.
mogôp6 - an empty ostrich eggshell. MOgopoO N.calabash; traditionally a large wooden eating bowl (for porridge, etc.).
mogopolôê - a thought; an idea; a view; an opinion. MOgorogoro N.same as mogorogorwane, green monkey orange.
mogorogoro - tunnel.
mogorogorwane - m0-, same as mogorogoro, green monkey orange. MOgoroso N.scabies.
mogošane - indigestion; dyspepsia.
mogote - heat; fever; megote is rarely used but nowadays refers to strong drinks.
mogotêlê - heat; fever; temperature.
mogotlha - a cattle crush; a trap. prov. bana ba tshipa ba tsaya tsela e le nngwe fêla, fêla fa ba kgaogana ke baso ba mogotlha.
mogotlha - passage.
mogêtlhôê - a species of camel-thorn tree; bushman cwanap; giraffe thorn; Fabaceae.
mogotomoduane - a poisonous grub that covers itself in grass, fatal to animals that swallow it.
mogotšana - small eating bowl, traditionally made of wood but nowadays of metal or plastic.
mogêtswana - MO0-.
mogwaaka - my son-in-law.
mogwagadi - (same as "mogogwadi"), a man's father-, or mother-in. law.
mogwagadia - a parent-in-law of; must be followed by a | noun.
mogwagadiago - your parent-in-law.
mogwagadiagwê - (same as "mogwagadi"), his parent-in-law.
mogwagadiaka - m0-, my parent-in-law [said by the son-in-law]. NB. all the relatives of the inlaws are automatically in-laws.
mogwagadiê - 1A9-, same as mogwagadiagwê, his parent-in-law. |.
mogwagwa - (same as "mokwakwa"), spineless monkey orange.
mogwagwadiago - ™m0-, same as mogwagadiago, your parent-in-law (said to the son-in-law, or to one of his relations).
mogwaka - ™m0-, my brother/sister-in-law (a man's wife's relatives).
mogwakao - ™mo-, thy brother's wife; a woman's sister-in-law.
mogwana - giant raisin bush with edible berries; Tilaceace; also dwarf date palm; feather palm; wild date palm; Arecaceae.
mogwang - M0-, a shoot, } or blade just emerging above the ground; the blade of an ear of corn; the leaf of a reed.
mogwasa - M0-, a rustling sound, as of something moving in the grass, or rushes; sound of feet.
mogwê - son-in-law; a man's wife's brother; a sister's husband.
mogwebi - trader.
mogwele - similar to } sepêpê and setlhora, a squirrel; a night ape, or bush baby; a jay.
mogwelegwele - | same as mogwele, which is more commonly ' used; a jay.
mogwere - M0-, a big calf fit to be weaned.
moheitane - | heathen [borrowed].
moherehere - a species of tree; Maytenus tennispina.
mohik6 - M0-, same as mhikê, a branch of thorn bush or one of a set of poles placed at the entrance of a kraal to signify death of the last member of the home.
mohiri - (same as "mothapi"), tenant; employer.
mohu - 0-, same as mmu moruthwane, a wasp; a hornet.
mohubu - /0-, umbilicus.
mohumagadi - ™M0-, a chief's wife; a woman of importance; a lady.
mohumanegi - ™0-, a poor person; destitute person.
mohumi - ™0-, a rich person.
mohupe - the larger love-bean, round in shape.
moidi - ™0-, one who hates, or abhors.
moikaêg6 - ™m0-, the back of a seat.
moikanngwi - ™mo-, siNG.or baikanngwi same as moikanngwa and moikanyegi, a trusted person.
moikanyegi - baikanngwi a trusted person.
moikepi - ™mo-, a wicked person.
moikgagapeledi - one who confiscates property of other people unjustly; an extortioner.
moikgatlê - (same as "moitlamd"), a belt; a girdle.
moikgogomosi - ™0-, same as moipegi, a proud person; an arrogant person.
moikokobetsi - (same as "moingoltli"), a humble person.
moila - mo0-, an aversion; a taboo; a superstition.
moilolê - pungent medicine, used to cause sneezing; medicine put to the nose to ascertain if life is extinct.
moima DER - S. pregnant.
moimana - ™m0-, a pregnant woman.
moingotli - low lying (person); a humble person.
moipegi - similar to moikgogomosi, a proud or conceited person.
moipelê - a celebration.
moipobodi - (same as "moipoledi"), confessor; a catechumen.
moipolai - suicide. pRov., moipolai ga a lelelwe.
moitaodi - one who resents discipline; an undisciplined individual, a free, or independent person.
moithatis6 - a love philtre, or charm. (lit. medicine to make one love me.).
moitibolê - a first-born.
moitige - a gentle slope.
moitimokanyi - a hypocrite.
moitlami - a man or woman who has taken religious vows.
moitlamê - girdle; waistband; belt; sash.
moitlesi - used less frequently than moitlamôd, girdle; belt; sash.
moitlhê - ¢-, same as moitlhwê, a one-eyed person; state of being one-eyed; a squint-eyed person.
moitlhwê - (same as "moitlhd"), a one-eyed person.
moitlobo - slough outer skin; slough skin (of a reptile).
moitseanape - ™m0-, know, and nape, god of wisdom; diviner; a soothsayer.
moitsheki - the complainant.
moitshekisi - one who purifies himself.
moitshenkedwi - ™0-, veER.F. itshenkêlwa, a chosen one.
moitshepi - the holy one; a saint.
moitshomêlê - armour; protective othing.
moja - a long rein for a pack-ox burden; a little lappet left as fringe on a kaross.
mojaboswa - ™mo-, eat, and boswa, heirloom; an heir; an heir-apparent.
mojadi - a sower.
mojaja - m0-, wild granadilla.
mojaki - sinc.or bajaki, a sojourner; a migrant labourer.
mojakê - (same as "kgêrê"), a doorway; a door post.
mojakubu - a species of imbing plant.
mojanala - ™/0-, eat, and nala, holiday; a casual visitor; a tourist; a holidaymaker. _.
mojao - M0-, poison leaf; Dichapetalaceace.
mojatshidi - ™mo-, a single hartebeest.
mojêla - ™mo-, credit.
moji - a glutton.
mojê - food; that which is eaten.
moka - MAN. same as mokane, as.
mokabaoane - (same as "mokabaeyane"), klipspringer.
mokabedi - an interpreter.
mokabi - Combretum transvaalense; scrotal swelling; hydrocele; hernia.
mokabê - siING.or mekabê, a calabash.
mokadi - the fat of a bullfrog.
mokadisiwane - a right-handed man; a messenger.
mokae INTERR - M0-, of what nationality, or tribe? Ke mokae? what nationality is he?.
mokaedi - a girdle; director; a guide.
mokaidikaidi - a wanderer; a sojourner.
mokaikai - a species of bramble bush; Antizoma angustifolia, used by witches. 1. EXPR, go jesa mokaikai, to bewitch.
mokaka - an incorrigible, untamable or impudent person.
mokakata - a species of small tree, the bark of which is used for rope-making.
mokala - bushman cwanap, camel thorn; giraffe thorn; Fabaceae; Acacia negriscens; knob thorn tree.
mokalabata - sinc.or mekalabata, a species of wait-a-while thorn tree with edible berries.
mokaloba - sinc.or mekaloba, a very strong man; a giant; Goliath.
mokamanawe - (same as "mokekele"), wild custard apple; Annonaceae.
mokana - Corchorus kirkii, a species of tree.
mokankanyane - M0-, same as mototwane, epilepsy. apoplexy.
mokankele - mekankele species of bush; Grevia retinervis.
moka6 - (same as "katlole [rorj"), a thong, or thong for tying a cow's hind legs. Mokaota n.sinc.or Makaota, one of the Makaota tribe; a giant.
mokaotu - (same as "sekouta"), a very old person, or thing; a scout.
mokapana - (same as "mokawa"), trullus neudinianus; Herero cucumber; a species of creeper, edible, useq medicinally as a purgative and as a poison.
mokapu - something thrown up and caught in the mouth by children while playing.
mokaragana - or skipping about.
mokaralalê - a fit; epilepsy; fainting; a sudden seizure.
mokasa - a block of wood; a thick stump of wood.
mokata - Combretum transvalense; loam.
mokatak6 - (same as "serepodi"), and maribêla, stoep; a verandah.
mokatiswane - a young ox being broken in to be yoked, or a young cow being trained to be milked.
mokaulengwe - bakaulengwe a friend; an acquaintance; a good neighbour; a confidant; a brother in Christ.
mokawa - M0-, same as mokapana, trillus naudiniamus; a species of edible creeper, used as a purgative, also very poisonous.
mokea - used mainly as a reEL.s, that which is crooked, or uneven.
mokekele - sinc.or mekekele, same as mokamanawe, wild custard-apple.
mokênt6 - (same as "moêntd"), needle; injection; vaccination; inoculation.
mokete - a feast; mirth.
mokgabani - sinc.or bakgabani child.
mokgabê - smart othing; ostentatious smartness.
mokgadi - sinc.or bakgadi, a slanderer; an abusive person; a blasphemer.
mokgaijane - sinc.or bakgaijane, a guard of young men at the male initiation ceremony.
mokgakê - sinc.or mekgakê something ean and new.
mokgalôê - sinc.or mekgald, buffalo thorn; Sziziphus mucronata, has edible berries and leaves are used as a poultice.
mokgalêfatshe - a dwarf species of buffalo thorn.
mokgantitswe - (same as "mokgatitswe"), a small dark brown lizard.
mokga6 - a very poisonous plant, or bulb, used as medicine, or poison. mokgara DIAL VAR.OF mokgêrwa, which is the popular term; a lean, starved dog.
mokgarakgatshegi - ™0-, a wanderer; a vagabond.
mokgatha-thete - a pioneer; a piece of ground ploughed for the first time.
mokgathê - siNc.or mekgathd ploughing of new ground; a piece of ground ploughed for the first time.
mokgatlhisi - sinc.or bakgatlhisi entertainer.
mokgatlhôê - sinc.or mekgatlhd, party; society.
mokgatšha - a valley; a dale; a meadow.
mokgau - similar to mogau, a species of large vulture; withered, or shrivelled grass, or corn, harmful to. animals when eaten.
mokgêkgêth6 - sINc.or mekgêkgêthd the half of a slaughtered animal cut down by the side of the backbone, but without the backbone; the side with the backbone is referred to as mofama o mogolo, the greater half.
mokgêlê - sinc.or mekgêlê, same as sekhukhu, a banner; a standard; an insignia; an umbrella.
mokgeledi - a deep scratch, or stripe.
mokgêrwa - a lean starved dog; a mongrel.
mokgethi - a taxpayer.
mokgethisi - sinc.or bakgethisi, a tax collector; one who exacts tribute.
mokgêbaladi - sinc.or bakgêbaladi a meek, humble or timid person.
mokgobe - a lot; a collection of objects of the same kind.
mokgôb6 ABsN - M0-, NOPL.,a reproach; abuse; reviling.
mokgobogê - an abrasion.
mokgokgoma - (same as "kgdkgêtsd"), which is more frequently used, a windpipe.
mokgokolosa - sINc.or mekgokolosa a descending slope; a steep bank; a shelving descent; incline.
mokgolasetsôê - (same as "mogolasetsd"), a hook for controlling an animal.
mokgomilê - siING.oF mekgomild, a hook.
mokgomphatha - wild raisin bush.
mokgona - dark brown.
mokgong - a part of the rites of bojale or female puberty ceremony.
mokgono - used as REL.s. reluctant; o mokgono, he is reluctant.
mokgopa - aloe.
mokgopama - ™mo-, a straightforward person; a perverse, or refractory person.
mokgêpane - (same as "mokgopha"), which is more frequently used, giant aloe; or Aloe littoralis, or Aloe marlothii.
mokgophê - the braying of skins by rubbing them between the hands.
mokgoreletsi - disturber.
mokgori - lit. one who has a full tummy; a wellto-do person; a wealthy individual.
mokgôrê - a pole; stump or dry trunk of a tree; the side post of a kraal gate; a crosspole in a kraal gateway; in Christian literature, the Cross; house at the lands; a temporary dwelling.
mokgêrêikagê - (same as "moagontlhêmê"), a prefabricated building.
mokgêrênyane - M0-, same as mokgwêrênyane, barthroated apalis.
mokgosi - a loud shout; an alarm.
mokgotlwane - cold with cough.
mokgotšhe - a plant of the sisal species, used as a binder. Mokgotu n.sING.or Bakgotu, same as Mokgothu, one of the Bakgotu, or Koranna people.
mokgwa - a custom; a tradition; a practice, a habit; peculiarity; method; style.
mokgwa - Acacia burkei; an ironwood thorn tree.
mokgwabo - the tracks of a drove of cattle, or a crowd of people.
mokgwapha - a species of aloe, whose ashes are added to drinking water to induce poultry to purge.
mokgwarits6 - (same as "mokgwarinyd").
mokgwar6 - matches; a matchstick.
mokgwasa - (same as "mogwasa"), rustling; actual sound, as of something moving through twigs and foliage; rumour.
mokgwas6 - the concept of rustling; sound as a concept.
mokgweetsi - driver.
mokgwelea - a bush korhaan; heathcock.
mokgwelekgwele - blue bush guarri; Ebenaceae.
mokgweleê - a burden; a heavy load.
mokhadu - a troop of gemsbok.
mokhasi - common tush plant.
mokhe - Acacia nitotica.
mokhesa - Deredendrum uncinatum.
mokhibe - a species of tree.
mokhin6 - (person with), absent front tooth.
mokhisa - a scratch as from thorn, or pin; a stripe on a piece of oth.
mokhobe - a block of wood shaped like a foot for making, or repairing shoes and boots; a shoemaker's last.
mokhukhane - sinc.or mekhukhane, a species of blackberry bush.
mokhure - Ricinus communis; plant bearing thorny pods, favourite food for goats.
mokhutla - a hedge; jackal skins; a kaross made of jackal] skins.
mokhutlana - a low hedge; small jackal skin; the skin of a young jackal; a kaross made from skins of young jackals.
mokikêla - (same as "mohikêla"), which is more frequently used, common cold; a catarrhal cold; coryza.
mokikiana - a species of tall tree.
mokima - sinc.or bakima, obese person; stoutness.
mok6 - marrow; kerne] of fruit, or pip.
mokoa - a heap.
mokôba - Acacia burkei; Acacia negriscens.
mokob6 - mildew.
mokobolwane - mekobolwane calfskin.
mokoduê - sInc.or mekoduê, a lean animal; an emaciated animal. prov., mokoduê go tsosiwa o o itekang.
mokodumetsa - an abrupt descent; a steep decline on a bank.
mokojwi - siING.oF bakojwi, despised one.
mokokole - sinc.or mekokole, same as mokwekwele, wild custard-apple; Annonaceae.
mokêkêmal6 - botulism.
mokôkôtlêl6 - supplication.
mokokotletsi - bakokotletsi a succourer; a collector.
mokôkôtl6 - ridge; the back; backbone.
mokokwana - a quiver for arrows.
mokokwane - a species of tree.
mokôla - epistaxis; haemorrhage from the nose. 1p. ExPR., go ntlaya mokêla, to sit round an ox hide and bray it.
mokolane - siNc.or mekolane, same as mokolwane, which is more commonly used, a palm tree.
mokole - similar to petse, a deep well; a deep pit; an ox slaughtered at a betrothal feast by the friends of the bridegroom-to-be.
mokôlêla - sinc.or mekêlêla, a spinal cord.
mokôl6 - a descending slope; a steep bank; a steep descent.
mokolobetsi - one who baptises; the baptist.
mok616k6 - series.
mokolotisi - a cross-examiner; prosecutor; a lender.
mokomane - similar to mokomakomane, a grey mouse with bushy tail; a dormouse; a drizzle; a light shower.
mokome - a present of berries, or bulbs.
mokomoto - (same as "serOka"), rough leaved corkwood tree; a soft wood thorn tree; rough leaved corkwood tree.
mokona - suck marrow out of a bone.
mokonaka - suck out many times; lick many a time.
mokonêga - suckable, as sap, or marrow out of a bone; lickable.
mokonêla - suck; lick.
mokonetse - has sucked, or licked.
mokong - (same as "mokolo"), a steep ascent; a steep ascending bank.
mokongwa - a tree bearing a stone fruit, like a peach; featherweight tree.
mokonnê - has sucked, or licked, as sap.
mokonolodi - bakonolodi panel-beater.
mokoofute - remnants of dough made into a bun by whoever has to wash the utensil [borrowed].
mokêpa - (same as "mokwêpa"), which is more frequently used, a black mamba, a very poisonous snake.
mokopatiri - ™mo-, job seeker; job applicant.
mokopi - a beggar; one who asks for a thing.
mokêrê - a canoe; a boat; water.
mokošo - a white thorn tree; Acacia albida.
mokotla - purse.
mokotla - (same as "mokwatla"), the back; the spine; a backbone.
mokôêtê - siINc.or mekêtê, meat from selected parts of a cow, or ox usually eaten by males on ceremonial occasions; the junction of the backbone and tail; a tailless or stump-tailed animal; sacral area.
mokotšhong - jackal berry; Ebonaceae.
moku - Acacia robusta; a thorn tree with long, straight, small-hooked horns.
mokubisana - similar to mokomakomane, a light shower.
mokub6 - (same as "mokobê"), mildew, mould, or mouldiness.
mokubukubu - riot.
mokuju - a species of wild fig-tree.
mokukuthôê - sinc.or mekukuthd, a bone at the tail of the animal; coccyx.
mokukutlwana - the vein of a leaf.
mokuru - the Damara turtle-dove; a kaross; a blanket made of animal skins.
mokutukutu - rectum.
mokwa - m0-, same as morotamadi, motswamadi, Plerocarpus angolensis; mukwa, or kiaat.
mokwadi - a writer; an author; a scribe.
mokwakwa - state of ay loam during dry season.
mokwakwa - (same as "mogwagwa"), edible spineless monkey orange, dried into cake by open fire.
mokwakwana - M0-, a quiver of arrows.
mokwaladikgang - ™m0-, journalist.
mokwalakwala - M0-, probably same as mokwakwa, spineless monkey orange.
mokwaledi - sinc.or bakwaledi, an amanuensis; a secretary; a journalist.
mokwalêla - (same as "mokêlêla"), spinal cord.
mokwalê - (same as "melawana ya mokwalê"), orthography; writing.
mokwane - m0-, same as mmokwane, measles; the alto voice in music; nettle-rash.
mokwatla - (same as "mokêtla"), which is less frequently used, the back; the spine; a backbone.
mokwekwele - siING.or mekwekwele same as mokokole, wild custard-apple; Annonaceae.
mokwele - (same as "mokole"), which is less frequently used, an ox slaughtered at a betrothal feast by the friends of the bridegroom-to-be; a species of tree, Vitex zeyheri.
mokwelekwele - ™0-, probably the same as mokwele, Vitex zeyheri. Mokwena N.a member of a tribe whose totem is kwena.
mokwidinyane - M0-, same as rankwidinyane, rankudunya and maloomi, Namaqua dove; Oena capensis.
mola - M0-, sand-apple caponois; line.
môla - (same as "mmêla which is more frequently used"), a species of edible berries from a mmêla tree; a river bed; space between two things; a rainbow.
molaetsa - (same as "molaetso"), which is less frequently used; a message.
molafatshe - sandapple; Parinari capensis, slender, erect with angular twining stems, bearing edible fruit.
molafê - rabies.
molaka - white discharge at the corners of an eye.
molala - palm.
molala - a serf; an inferior person; one belonging to an inferior tribe; a junior.
molala - a neck. wD. EXPR., Motho yo o molala, a thick-necked person, hence a bully.
molala-thakadu - an antbear hole, or lair.
molalatau - a species of thorn tree used in furniture making.
molaledi - one who lies in wait or in ambush; temptor.
molalediwa - (same as "molalediwi"), which is less frequently used, one invited to a feast or an occasion; a guest. molalediwi DIAL. var. oF molalediwa, which is more frequently used.
molamu - a knobkerrie; a stick with a large knob at one end.
molangwaka - 14¢., my sister-in-law (wife of my husband's brother.).
molangwê - 149, the wife of a husband's brother; a husband's sister-in-law through his brother.
molaôê - a law; a rule; a regulation.
molaodi - judge.
molaodi - a governor; a director; a ruler.
molaodisiwa - rarely used, a deputy ruler; a pro-consul; a governor.
molaodisiwi - rarely used, a deputy ruler; a pro-consul; a governor.
molaolabadirammêgê - personnel manager.
molaolakgotla - presiding officer of a legislative assembly; speaker.
molaêthê6 - meladthêd legislation.
molapôê - (same as "noka"), a river; a riverbed.
molatedi - a follower; a disciple.
molatlhaduswana - afterpains.
molatlhegi - latlhega, a castaway; a lost one.
molatlhiwa - an outcast.
molato - a fault; an error; a crime; a debt. 1p. Expr, go pêga molato, to blame, or to fix blame on.
molatodi - a gainsayer; a denier; one who gives the final condolence message to the people assembled at the end of a funeral; report someone's death.
molebalebedi - balebalebedi a bailiff; a steward for someone.
molebalebi - sinc.or balebalebi, a steward; a critic; one who examines.
molebatsi - (same as "mobeane"), and moyoani, live-long bush; Anacardiaceae.
molêbê - 1A9-, same as molêbêlêbê, or mokêtê, so and so; such and such a one.
molebedi - sinc.or balebedi, an overseer; a steward; one left in charge; an attendant; a watcher, or guard.
molebêla - used mainly.
molêbêlêbê - (same as "molêbê"), or mokêtê, so and so, such and such a one.
molebi - a seer; an overseer.
molebosêga - sinc.or balebosêga, an acceptable one.
moleele - s, tall. Used commonly as a proper noun.
molêka - a small speck or purulent sore, in an eye.
molekane - a comrade; a partner of an equal age; a companion.
molekangwetsi - and ngwetsi, daughter-in-law, small grass very troublesome in gardens. The eradication is a test of efficiency of a daughter-in-law, hence the name "tester of the daughter-in-law.".
molekê - a probation; a temptation; a pitfall; a tribulation; a catastrophe.
molekwa - a probationer.
molelê - fire; heat; a particular cry or tune; the sound of fever.
molelê wa badimo - ya badimo, the will of the wisp.
molelwane - a boundary; a border of a country.
molêma - used mainly as a REL.s., left of hand; left-handed; crooked-horned, with one pointing up and one down.
molemagalê - species of tall grass found in gardens.
molemi - ™mo-, a ploughman; a tiller; a husbandman; a farmer.
molemi-morui - farmer.
molem6 - goodness.
molemosi - critic.
moleofi - a sinner.
molêpa - a milk sac; the unbrayed thong of a sandal.
molepanaledi - astronomer.
moleperê - a leper [borrowed].
molepi - a watcher; an observer; a gazer.
molep6 - anything in the nature of a loop, as eye of a rein, or handle of a bucket or pot.
moleta - one who waits. pRrov., moleta ngwedi o leta lefifi. Molete n.dwellers of the Bamalete district of Botswana and the adjacent area in Western Transvaal; a tribe whose totem is the buffalo.
molete - a deep natural hole or pit; a dungeon; an abyss; hell.
moleti - ™mo-, similar to moleta, one who keeps guard; a watchman.
moletlanyi - sinc.or baletlanyi, peacemaker.
moletlo - a feast; party.
moletsa - a girdle made of beads or bits of ostrich shell.
moletsamoropa - drummer.
moletsathomo - pianist.
molêtsê - a leg.
moletswa - a parasite-like mistletoe, the juice of which is used as birdlime called boletswa, or maletswa.
molôbê - deep black mud; ground that gives way to heavy weights in wet weather.
molôbê - a piece of the lower bowel of an animal, eaten by the head of a family.
molodi - a whistling sound; the sound made by an instrument; a tune.
molodi - siING. oF melodi, same as lodi and /elodi, the innermost bark of a thorn tree, used for making twine; a cord; fibre.
molodikane - a woman's sister-in-law, being the wife of her husband's brother.
moloi - a wizard; a witch; a poisoner; one who acts treacherously.
molomatsêbê - and tsêbe, ear; an informer.
molome - a species of large red caterpillar.
molomegi - ™o-, a cupper; one who cups, or extracts blood, by means of a horn.
molomi - a biter; a cupper.
molom6 - the first-fruits; eating of first-fruits. kgwedi ya ntlha ya molomê, the first month of the Setswana year.
molomo - a mouth; lip; a beak of a bird; an opening, as a tube, piping or tunnel; a foreskin. 1p. EXPR, go tswa molomo, to open the mouth in speaking. PROV, SejO sennye ga se fete molomo.
molope - ¢-, same as molepe, widow-bird.
molêra - M0-, same as molwara, ash; soap. 1D. EXPR, go tlaa Sa logong go sala molêra.
molori - a dreamer.
molotlhanyi - a mischief-maker; a stirrer of strife.
molôt6 - a species of hardwood tree; Acacia erubescens, with very sweet gum.
molêtsana - ™mo-, a scoundrel; a scamp; a villain.
molotwê - used mainly as a REL.s proud in gait; very precise and particular; finicky in dress.
molwetsi - ™mo-, a sick person; a patient.
moma - shut, the mouth; be silent. 1. EXPR, moma molomo, be tight-lipped.
momagana - be connected; joined to one another.
momagantsê - has connected one thing to another; has glued, or soldered together.
momaganya - glue, or solder together; connect one thing to another. momaganye vV.s.PFT. < momagana, has become connected, or attached one to the other.
momaganyetsa - m0-, graft.
momela - a sprout from grain of corn; sprouted corn for beer or sour porridge.
momenagan6 - a roll; a folding.
momen6 - a hem; a fold of material.
mometse - has glued to; has attached one thing to another.
mometsO - throat; oesophagus; pharynx area of tonsils.
mometsomosweu - diptheria.
momisa - cause to hold a thing between the lips.
môêm6 - shin-bone: the lower bone in the leg of an animal or " bird; the thin part of the leg, below the calf: tibia.:.
momolola - open the mouth.
momona - suck. mêmêtla _v.s. simp. speak with reserve; give stingily.
momotlile - has spoken with reserve.
momotshekedi - a Slinger.
mompati - ™mo-, same ag mopati, a partner; a spouse; a marriage partner.
mompudu - (same as "mmupudu"), which is more frequently used a tree bearing edible fruit; feather-palm; " wild date-palm.
momunê6 - a reed for sucking water; a filter, mona vV.s. sIMp., suck.
monagan6 - consciousness; thought.
monahune - a rumour.
monakaladi - species of edible bulb.
monakana - a buckler.
monak6 - bo-, DIAL. VAR. OF bonakê, quickness; rapidity.
monala - elongation of the hoof owing to lack of certain minerals.
monamane - a species of tree, the wood of which is used for making spoons, etc.
monam6 - the rank, or runner of a creeping plant.
monana - ™Mo0-, youth; young people; used mainly as a RELs. < o monana, he/she is young, or of tender age.
monang - (same as "montsana"), mosquito.
monape - M0-, a belt from which a man's skin skirt hangs.
monata wa thipa - ya dithipa, same as mokwatla wa thipa, the back of a knife.
monate - delightfulness; nice, used.
mainly as a - s. pleasant; easy; nice; 1D. EXPR, go jesa monate, give pleasure or delight; go ja monate, to enjoy.
monatê - wild syringa tree; Burkea africana; the nat, or grub which eats the leaves, is edible.
mone - M0-, which is the form used in speech; children's disease of eyes spread by flies; probably caratitis, or conjuctivitis. Monekero N.™m0-, Negro [borrowed].
monêpênêpê - a species of acacia, the pods of which are used as a cure for venereal disease.
mong - ™/0-, owner; master.
mong - M0-, sex; used as a question, what sex?.
mong ka ênê - ka ênê, his neighbour.
mong ka lona - ka lona, your (pL) neighbour.
mongago - short form of mong wa gago, yOUr (2ND PERS. SING.) master.
mongagwê - ™mo-, bagwê, short form of mong wa gagwê.
mongaka - /™0-, baka, short form of mong wa aka, same as mongame, my master/mistress.
mongala - /0-, a lawless person; one who defies laws or customs; a headstrong individual; a wildly behaved domestic animal.
mongalôê - DIAL. VAR. OF mongala.
mongana - a species of thorn tree; Acacia mellifera.
monganganyêg6 - whooping cough.
mongapa - scratch.
mongatêg6 - a fainting fit.
mongat6 - (same as "motsetd"), babies' napkins; loin skins.
mongobê - DIAL. VAR. OF mongêpê, end section of large intestine; rectum.
mongobê - dew.
mongobolê - siING. oF mengobolê cream of milk when removed to be used as an ointment.
mongobutsa - a bone in an animal's leg above the shin.
mongodi - softness; gentleness; used mainly as an apv.s, softly; gently.
mongoloi - a paste made of locusts and berries.
mongongoregi - ™mo0-, a complainant; a plaintiff; a grumbler; a murmurer.
mongôp6 - large intestines; rectum.
mongwago - your master/mistress.
mongwagwê - his/her master/mistress.
mongwakê - beng-ba-kê, my master/mistress.
mongwe - ™mo0-, DER.F.ADJ ORENUM. ngwe, a certain one; someone; somebody. '.
mongwe le mongwe - le bangwe, everyone; anybody.
monkanaa - ™mo-, a mate of; an equal of. NB, must be followed by a noun or pronoun.
monkanaabê - their mates; their equals.
monkanaago - your (SING.) mate.
monkanaagwê - ™M0-, his/her mate.
monkanaaka - my mate; my equal.
monkanaakê - ™mo-, my mate; my equal.
monkanaats6 - its mates.
monkanaayê - siNc.or bankanaayê its mate.
monkanao - (same as "monkanaago"), your (.
monkane - a mate; an equal; a comrade.
monkao - your neighbour.
monkgê - similar to menkê, a smell; one that can be described by a particular smell; a definite type of smell.
monk6 - similar to monkgê, a smell.
monna - ™o-, same as monona, which is less frequently used, probably derived from both mq, sit, and nona, lubricate; a man; a male.
monnaa - ™M0-, younger.
monnakgang - (same as "kgomodimetsing a species of herb used in making medicinal tea"),. PRov., monna yo o nkgang o nkga le ditsagagwê.
monnamogolo - bannabagolo an old man.
monnamotswe - a shrub resembling a broom; Cadaba aphylla.
monnani - ™m0-, a lame person; a cripple.
monnao - ¢-, your younger brother, of a male, or your younger sister, of a female.
monnawê - his/her younger brother or sister.
monnê - has sucked, as a sweetmeat, etc.
monnelaruri - ™o-, permanent.
monngabo - ™mo-, babo, short form of beng ba bênê; their master/mistress.
monngalona - ba lona short form of mong wa lona, your @ND PERS. PL.) Master/mistress.
monngame - ™mo-, ba me short form of mong wa me, same as monngaka, my master/mistress.
monni - a tizen of; a dweller of; an inhabitant of. ns. must be followed by a noun or pronoun.
mon6 - a thumb.
mono - ADV. OF PL, non-specific or locality here; in here.
monobotlo - used mainly as a REL.s, to signify dense, as a huge crowd of people.
monokeditse - has taken things in order to rank them, i.e. one by one.
monokêla - stealthily; gradually.
monoketsa - take in order; take singly or one by one.
monoketse - has taken singly or one by one.
monôk6 - the monkey-nut; peanut.
monokwane - ™m0-, a species of thick tree with medicinal roots; wood used for carving.
mondl6 - (same as "bondlê"), kindness; gentleness.
monomotsi - OFT, DER F. mono, this place here, and motsi, day, hence, here and now.
monona - (same as "monnda"), a man; now used in very few dialects.
monongwaga - OFT., DER. F. mono, this place here, and ngwaga, year; this year.
monôn6 - fatness. NB, used to be a sign of healthy looks.
monopi - (same as "menyopi"), a leech.
monopudu - a tree producing milky latex; evergreen, moderately large.
monôt6 - the aw of a bird; the spur of a cock.
montê6 - a staff for beating sandals; buttermilk.
montlafatsi - a beautician; one who makes things ean and beautiful.
montlhwa - used mainly as a RELS ring-streaked.
montsana - ™mo-, same as monang, a mosquito; a gnat.
montsane - (same as "monang"), a mosquito; a gnat.
montšantša - Bauhinia petersiana, a species of tree.
montshi - a contributor; one who gives.
monwana - m0-, a finger, or a toe, used euphemistically to Tefer to penis, hence go gamola monwana, to urinate; the pointed end of the heart.
monwane - M0-, a bush bearing edible berries like a currant, Securinega virosa.
monwi - a drinker; a beer drinker.
monyadi - a bridegroom.
monyadiwa - (same as "monyadwi"), bride.
monyadwi - (same as "monyadiwa"), bride.
monyaku - similar to mokapatla, bitter-apple.
monyalwa - a bride.
monyaê - a ricochet, as of a bullet.
monyatsi - a despiser; one who belittles.
monyê - a species of short grass bearing a white flower with an acid taste; dew.
monyedi - a weaver.
monyêla - suck a liquid through a tube or straw.
monyêla lehuka - one who drinks from the bottom end ' of a milk sack.
monyêlênyêlê - | peeling plane (Achiaaceae); a crocus; Ochna sp.
monyêlwa ke kgomo - (same as "modimako"), the tall pole erected in the initiation ceremony for males, probably akin to the ashera of early Old Testament days; it ) is said it represents that which excels any created thing; an upward pointing thing, as the horns of an eland.
monyetsane - area below occiput; top of neck at back.
monyetse - has sucked water through a tube or straw.
mony6 - dew.
monyêny6 - threadworm.
monyorwi - a thirsty person. moo LOC. DEMONS. FoRM, signifies the proximity of a thing that is nearer to the person spoken to; that.
modbamedi - baêdbamedi similar to morapedi, worshipper; obedient one.
mooka - a species of thorn tree; Acacia karoo.
moka - siNc.or medka, hives made in the ground by small black flies that do not sting; small black honey-making flies.
mookamedi - sinc.or baokamedi inspector.
mookami - an overseer; a director; a supervisor.
mookana - but used as a DIAL. vAR, a species of thorn tree; Acacia karoo.
mookedi - DIAL. VAR. oF mookodi, which is the commonly used version; very light rain, or drizzle.
mooki - sinc.or baoki, a nurse; a medical orderly; anyone including those who are untrained and look after the sick or disabled.
mook6 - betrayal; enticement.
mookodi - /M0-, DIAL. VAR. OF mookedi, very light rain, or drizzle.
moodkošo - a large cactus.
moolelo - echo.
moologa - a species of tree said to have medicinal qualities; the smoke from burning wood is good for headaches, if inhaled; it is also used to prevent bean weevils from attacking ripe corn; Croton gratissimus.
modlwana - a threshing staff.
moôn6 - a snore; a grumbling; moan; the crux of the matter; the overall view.
moênyana - m0-, a species of tree whose seeds, when ripe, stick to othes.
moopa - Mm0O-, AND3, M0-, and meopa, same as moopana, a barren person or animal; infertile.
moopafadiwi - an eunuch [Forj,one made barren.
moopana - M0-, AND3, M0-, and meopana, same as moopa, a barren person or animal; infertile.
modpêdi - a singer.
modêpêlwane - (same as "moêpêlane"), the shouting, ululations and singing of a victorious army, choir, etc.
moori - ™M0-, one who warms himself at the fire.
mootl6 - the chewing of the cud.
mootlwana - m0-, a threshing stick or staff; cows and goats going out to graze before being milked. |.
mopaêla - a switch; a stick for beating with. |.
mopagami - ™m0-, a rider; a imber.
mopaki - witness.
mopak6 - (same as "mophakê"), a thick ring of rafters for strengthening the roof; one of a set of poles for osing a gateway; a pole placed outside a hut to indicate someone ill or a mother with a new-born baby in the hut; the style of packing or packaging.
mopalami - (same as "pagarna"), a rider; a imber.
mopaldê - the state of being famished; malnutrition.
mopamê6 - (same as "mmopandê"), which is frequently used, starvation; hunger; thinness; emaciation.
mopapetlolodi - panel-beater.
mopateletsi - siING.oF bapateletsi, a false witness; a calumniator.
mopati - (same as "mompati"), a partner; spouse; a marriage partner.
mopêlêt6 - spelling.
mopeneweng - species of tree bearing red fruit that is used medicinally; the fruit looks as if it has been turned inside out, hence the name pena, expose and eng; Chamarea capensis; Pappea capensis.
mopere - boiled fresh milk.
moperesiti - a priest [borrowed].
moperofeti - ™mo-, DIAL. VAR, moporofeti, Which is more commonly used, a prophet [borrowed].
mophakalêg6 - (same as "mophakalêgê"), a cross-beam; a bar; a top cross-piece.
mophak6 - ration.
mophak6 - (same as "mopako"), a lintel.
mophakwana - 0-, pi. oF mophakê, a lintel; a doorpost; a cross-pole at the top of the verandah poles.
mophane - the mophane tree; a species of tree growing north of the Tropic of Capricorn in Africa; Colophospermum mopane; the grub called phane, which eats the leaves, is itself edible.
mophanyane - /0-, chapped skin.
mophaphane - ™0-, species of tree with very smooth bark, used medicinally for coughs, etc.
mophatê - a group of individuals of the same age; a regiment of men or boys, who went through the initiation ceremony together; gang; squad.
mophekalêg6 - mephekalêgê same as mophakalêgê, a cross-bar, etc.
mophekodi - sinc.or baphekodi, a healer; a charmer; one who uses charms to protect individuals from being bewitched. mophekwana DIAL. VAR. oF mophakwana, which more frequently used, pim. oF mophakê, a lintel; a doorpost; a cross-pole at the top of the verandah poles.
mophetsos6 - testis.
mopholane - a species of tree (probably extinct).
mophomedi - a hasty person; one who rushes in; one hasty in speech; one who quarrels easily.
mophomo - the flesh on the shoulder blade of a person.
mophothi - baphothi thrasher; one who beats corn out of ears by Stick.
mophoumedi - (same as "mophomedi"), a rash person.
mophuratshukudu - a tree which is used medicinally for bee stings; Catophractes alexandni.
mophuthôê - a parcel; a bundle.
mophutholodi - baphutholodi lit. one who unwraps; a translator; an interpreter; a commentator.
mophutlu - the papyrus, or river flag; used as a REL.s., to convey the meaning of weak, or useless wood.
mopipi - a species of evergreen tree; stinkbos wonderboom; Boscia foetida; berries are edible. Mopitlê N.same as Mopitlwê, the month of March.
mopolitiki - (same as "lepolitiki (For)"), politician.
mopopotlo - a weal; a mark left by a stroke; a smooth part of an animal's stomach.
mopôrê - a bass voice in music.
moputsê - M0-, reward; a prize.
mora - speed; rapid pace.
moraba - ™m0-, a bag usually made of snake skin, for charms or medicine.
morabaraba - traditional chess; draughts-game.
moradintana - Pavetta eylesii; a moroadintana tree.
moraedi - a temper.
morafe - a tribe; a nation.
morafolo - first food taken from a pot for a headman; a memorial offering.
moraga - mud that has thickened through evaporation; a slough; a quagmire.
moragangaka - a species of herb, used for healing.
morag6 - AND T., behind; after; afterwards; backwards.
moragorago - AND T., long after.
moraka - a cattle post; a large herd of cattle, etc.
morala - a species of tree, the wood of which is used for making spoons, etc.; Gardenia spatulifolia.
moraladi - a newly-married man; one given the right to visit on intimate terms his affianced bride.
moraladi - a stripe; a streak.
moralôê - a long mark; a line; a straight line.
morama - morama nut; gemsbuck beans; a species of tree with edible nuts; Tylosema esculenta; winding euphobia; imbers including Gymnema sylvestre and Sycamone parvifolia; wild edible vine. Moranang N.A¢-, the month of April.
moraê - M0-, medicine smeared on houses as a charm for a town or household.
morapa - M0-, same as mhogolê, a horizontal bar on two upright poles to hang blankets over.
morapalêg6 - siING.or merapalêgê a cross-bar; anything lying across another.
morapatse - a log of wood.
morapedi - one who prays.
morapêlêl6 - an intercessory prayer; a supplication on behalf of another.
morapêlê - similar to thapêld, a prayer; a supplication; a prayer meeting.
morara - M0-, ivy.
morarane - (same as "morarwane"), imbers including Antizoma angustifolia and Stommatostemma monteiroae.
morategi - a precious or beloved one; a favourite.
morath6 - probably a dam across a stream; a weir; a bridge.
morati - ™0-, a lover (active).
moratisO - a love philtre, traditionally, a wife puts a love potion or moratisê, in the husband's food to maintain his love.
moratiwa - ™m0-, same as moratwa and moratiwi; the latter is rarely used; a loved one; one who is loved.
moratletle - (same as "moretlhetlhe"), a species of tree, its leaves are used medicinally as a blood purifier; Scolopia zeyheri. moratwi DIAL. VAR. OF moratiwa, a loved one.
more - M0-, a root; a tree; a poison; a rash; scabies.
moreana - ™mO-, medicine. Moreba N.a barren animal.
moreboloki - sinc.or bareboloki, our saviour. Moreetsi N.™0-, a listener. Moreki N.a buyer. Morekisi N.™0-, a seller; a shopkeeper; a shop assistant.
moreku - /0-, same as.
morekure - tambuti tree.
moremi - /0-, a chopper; one who cuts down trees.
moremogolo - the large bone in the diviner's equipment, regarded as the chief or great medicine. PROV., Moremogolo go betliwa wa taola, wa motho o a ipetla.
moremosêtlha - 170-, a species of thorn tree.
morêna - a lord; a chief; a master; sir.
morenonotshi - our strengthener; one who makes us able.
moreê - m0-, same as morad, medicine used as charms for town or household.
morêp6 - a small kaross.
moreri - a preacher; a speaker; a governor of a feast.
morêrôê - a discussion, in private; a secret meeting; a family or an get-together; a conspiracy.
moreswedi - one who died for us; the saviour.
moreteladiane - a particular dance.
moretlo - unkindness; a bad turn. moretlwa DIAL. VAR. OF moretlwa, N.brandy bush; Grewia flava bush or berries; edible berries, also used in brewing of khadi; raisins; grapes.
morêtê - similar to serêto; a pet name; a term of endearment; a totem; a surname.
morêt6 - constriction mark round a limb.
moretologa - (same as "seretologa"), sour plum; Olacoceae; moretologa wa podi, Ximenia americana; merotologa wa kgomo, Ximenia caffra.
moribê - rhythmic and uniform action of women ploughing with hoes, or threshing corn.
morintikole - merintikole species of Pycnonotus nigricans; red-eyed bulbul.
moripO - a slope; the bottom of a hill; a dam constructed at the bottom of a hill.
moriri - human hair.
moritshana - the lid of a three-legged pot, shaped like a basin; patella. '.
morê - ™m0-, grey, Soup water in which meat has been boiled; sauce.
moroba - a young girl of marriageable age; a heifer; girl at puberty.
morêba - origin uncertain; pleasure; enjoyment.
morêbalê - sexual intercourse; a manner of sleeping.
morobana - ™0-, a strong person; a ever and able man.
morobanare - and nare, buffalo, a species of long grass used for thatching.
morôbê - puzzle bush; plant of Ehretia species, berries of which are edible; wild peach.
morobi - a reaper; a harvester.
morodi - (same as "morudy"), trust; dried marks of soup or any other liquid.
morogani - (same as "motlhapatsi"), a curse; one who insults; a vulgar person.
morôêg6 - a vegetable; herbaceous plant or part of one used for food; a vegetable that is cooked and eaten as a relish.
moroja - (same as "morojwa"), snot-apple; Azanza garekeana.
morojwa - M0-, same as moroja.
morokiwapula - similar to tlhatlhamedupi, a species of bird believed to foretell by its cries the coming of rain.
moroko - husks of grain after stamping; bran.
morokê - a seam in a garment; sewing.
morokola - a species of tree with flowers which have a fire-like scent; Carissa bispinosa.
morokolo - (same as "morotologa"), small sour plum; Olacaceae.
morokologa - (same as "morotologa"), large sour plum; monkey plum; Olacaceae.
morokomolog6 - urticaria; raised rash; small lumps on skin; urticarial rash.
morokots6 - the milk remaining in an udder after the calf or kid has sucked a second time during one milking session; the herd's portion of milk; a toll; bonus; interest.
morokwa - brown.
morokwana - female; an animal that is brown in colour.
morola - M0-, same as tholwana, same as tholwa, belladonna plant; the deadly nightshade; Solanum incanum. pRov., o se bonê tholwa borethe, teng go a baba.
morolakgomo - species of Solanum incanum; a species of belladonna, the juice is put into incisions in q girl's thigh at the puberty ceremony to show | she has been initiated.
morolana - (same as "morolwana"), the syringa tree.
morôlê COLL - 3, M0-, calves; large unweaned calf.
morolwane - (same as "mosalaosi"), a syringa tree.
morolwane - (same as "morolana"), a syringa tree.
morongwa - m0-, same as morongwi, a messenger.
morongwi - (same as "morongwa").
moropa - a drum; a wooden or earthen vessel used as a drum; a loud noise made by animals running; an eardrum.
moropana - m0-, a timbrel; tambourine.
mororôê - a snarl; a roar; the roaring noise made by a raging fire, etc.
mororodi - used as REL.S., in its to signify mixed colour; multi-coloured.
mororomi - ™m0-, one who trembles; a shiverer; one who shakes.
morota - used mainly as a REL.s immensity.
morotê - m0-, urine; semen.
morotologa - (same as "moretologa"), sour plum.
morotonoga - (same as "moretologa").
morotwana - m0-, bilharzia.
moru - M0-, thicket.
morubane - (same as "morufa"), a milking vessel; a bucket made of wood.
morubisi - an owl believed to be used by witches at night.
morudu - m0-, same as morodi, rust.
morufa - ™o0-, same as morubane, a milking vessel.
morufatšheše - vase.
morui - /0-, similar to mohumi, a possessor; a wealthy person.
morukudu - ™m0-, same as morukuru, tambuti tree; Spirostachus africana. hes morukuru DIAL. VAR. OF morukudu, which is less frequently used, tambuti tree.
morula - /0-, the morula tree; Sclerocarya caffra; plums are edible and used in making an intoxicating drink; soft wood is used for carving various types of utensils; kernels from fruits are delicious. Morule N.-, same as Sedimonthole, the month of December.
moruledi - tiler.
morulo - (same as "morolwana"), a syringa tree.
morumodi - ™mo-, same as morumolani, one who picks quarrels; one who offends; an aggressor; a trouble maker.
morumolani - (same as "morumodi").
moruni - a talebearer; a busybody.
moru6 - (same as "lerud"), a possession.
morup6 - M0-, a rcumcision.
morurêl6 - a pot used for cooking medicines.
moruta-pudê - grammar teacher.
moruta-tem6 - agricultural demonstrator.
morutabana - teacher.
morutabaoki - sister tutor.
morutametshameko - trainer (football etc.).
moruthasana - (same as "moruthure").
moruthure - m0-, same as moruthasana, cat thorn; common hook thorn; water thorn; Fabaceae.
moruthwane - (same as "mofu"), a hornet; a hornet's nest.
moruti - a teacher; a preacher; a minister of religion; a rabbi.
moruti - (same as "moriti"), a shade; a shadow.
morutla - a tree that bears orange-coloured fruit with a heavy tind; Rothmania capensis.
morutlaolôê - a giant.
morutlhare - (same as "moruthure"), cat thorn.
morutlhatana - (same as "moruthure and moruthasana"), cat thorn.
morutlhatshana - a species of thorn tree that grows in dry regions; Acacia caffra.
morutlwa - (same as "morutla").
morutshe - a case for needles and thread.
morutwa - ™m0-, same as morutiwa and morutwi, a learner; disciple.
morutwa - strychnos tree.
morutwatirê - apprentice.
morutwi - ™mo-, same as morutwa and morutiwa, strychnos tree.
moruuruu - like grass.
morwa - son; barwa is also acceptable as a form of the plural.
morwaaka - my son (addressing him).
morwaake - sinc.or barwaake, my son (talking about him).
morwadi - daughter.
morwadia - daughter of.
morwadiake - my daughter.
morwadie - his/her daughter.
morwadio - your daughter.
morwalêla - m0-, a flood.
morwalôê - a burden carried on the head; a load.
morwad - ™mo-, your son.
morwawê - his or her son.
morweetsana - M0-, same as basetsana, girl; maiden.
moša - M0-, same as mosê or ramogwe, yellow mongoose.
mosadi NC - a woman; a wife.
mosak6 - a large kraal with several gates; a laager; an encampment of wagons arranged to be a defence.
mosala - a very large broad-headed fish. mosalagae ber. F. sala, remain, and gae, home, one who stays behind; one who keeps the fires burning.:.
mosalaosi - ™mo-, same as morolwane, a syringa tree.
mosale - a survivor.
mosam6 - a pillow; cushion; buttock.
mogampa - state of being stark naked.
mogaoka - tangled bushes growing thickly together; a thicket of tangled bush; also a species of tree or Acacia Grandicornuta.
mosari - M0-, a mantle; a kaross made of hartebeest skins. Mosarwa N.i1 mo-, and Masarwa, the latter is currently regarded as derogatory; a Bushman.
mosasa - M0-, a temporary structure for sheltering.
mosata - an imperious woman.
mošate - (same as "mosata"), a seat of government; a capital ty.
mošawa - (same as "motlhaba"), river sand; sand washed up by water; coarse sand.
mosebi - a backbiter.
mosedi - a small edible root.
mosegaseolo - a very strong species of grass used for thatching.
mosegi - tailor.
moseja - M0-, used mainly as an apDv.s., to mean on the other side; across, the land adjoining, or on the side of a river.
mosêka - long stout grass, like corn when ripe.
mosekaseki - critic.
moseki - ™mo-, one who sues another.
mosekisi - a prosecutor.
mosêlamotlhaka - (same as "lesêlamotlhaka"), a meercat; also a large black and white bird found in vleis.
moselawatshwene - a very soft grass used for weaving bracelets.
mosêlê - a trench; a furrow to conduct rain water; a channel.
mosêlêsêlê - a species of thorn bush; Dichrostachys nerea; sickle-bush.
mosêmê - m0-, the rush plant; a rush mat or screen; straw mat.
mosenene - /0-, grass snake; poisonous, it is thin striped.
mosenetara - ™m0-, senator [borrowed].
mosenki - (same as "mmatli"), a seeker; one who searches.
mosenyampa - ™m0-, abortionist.
mosenyi - a destroyer; a malefactor.
mose6 - m0-, same as motsheo, used mainly as a apv.s., the further end.
mosepedi - a traveller; a walker.
mosepele - m0-, a journey; a rate of walking; travel.
mosese - M0-, a woman's.
mosesebe - rich red soil.
mosetara - /0-, mustard; tree; mustard seed [borrowed].
moseti - ™m0-, a carver, principally in wood.
mosetla - used mainly as a REL.s. slow; easy-going. Mosêtlha n.same as Ngwanatsêlê, the month of November.
mosêtlha - a species of acacia tree; Peltophorum africanum.
mosêtlh6 - constriction on a limb; thorn; a ground creeper with yellow flowers and small sharp thorns; dubbeltjie thorn; marshmallow plant.
mosetsana - ™m0-, a female child; a girl.
mosetse - M0-, the mosetse tree or Cussonia species; also pith, or core, of a horn.
mosetshe - ™m0-, a peg. MOŠi N.smoke, PRov., maru ga se pula, mosi ke 6nê molelê.
mosiama - M0O-, a succulent that grows to some 45 cm; used medicinally in ceremonial purification, it is believed to keep away snakes.
mosiami - a just or righteous person.
mosiamisi - ™m0-, a rectifier; one who puts things right, or straight.
mosiapelo - M0-, leave and pelo, heart, a species of fruit tree.
mosidi - 770-, soot; gunpowder.
mosifa - M0-, a muscle; a sinew; a tendon.
mosifap66 - M0-, a 7 creeper, used medicinally as a blood purifier.
mosii - /0-, a fugitive; a victor, in a race.
mosikiri - /0-, Natal mahogany, Meliaceae.
mosikiri - 70-, same as motsikiri, species of long, thick grass, used for thatching and as brooms.
mosik6 - the place underneath the bank of a river.
mosilabele - the karee tree; the Port Jackson willow; Rhus lancea.
mosilapele - the mosilapele tree, or Rhus lancea; the karee tree.
mosilawankwê - 0-, the mosilawankwê tree, or Nicotiana glauca.
mosima - a hole in the ground; a burrow, of an animal.
mosimaganyetsi - ™0-, a pilot of a boat.
mosimama - (same as "mosiama"), a succulent used ceremonially.
mosimana - M0-, used for anus.
mosimane - m0-, a boy.
mosimanyane - ™Mo-, a little boy; the Meatus urinarius.
mosimegi - ™m0-, an officer; a guide possessing authority to direct.
mosinsila - brown ivory; Rhamnaceae.
mosipuri - m0-, Same as mogola, a beam; a cross-beam; a pole ina house for hanging karosses, etc.
mosireletsi - a protector; a guardian.
mositlanoka - a wild cotton bush; a milk bush; Asclepsis species. Mositlatlou N.the mositlatlou tree, or Mundulea sericea.
mositlhaphala - a flat poisonous centipede; a young hopping locust.
mositlwane - a thistle-like plant; a species of asparagus.
mosito - a tramp, or sound, of feet, vehicles, etc.; the mosito tree, or [boza brevispicata.
mositsane - a fernlike plant used for tanning purposes; Elephantorrhiza; elands.
mositsanyate - bell bear tree.
mositse - activity.
mosofologi - a hopeless one; a despairing one; one who has ceased to hope.
mosogole - a wooden beam.
mosogotlho - used mainly as an apv. PLA., being dangerously near.
mosokaphala - the mosokaphala tree, the leaves of which are used for tea, and an infusion of the bark as an emetic.
mosokêlatsebeng - /0-, twist, and tsêbê, ear; telephone; a imbing plant.
mosôko - a grass with white stalks.
mosôk6 - very thick unfermented porridge.
mosokôtlh6 - siInc.oF mesdkêtlhd rash on the thighs.
mosokwana - (same as "mosdkê").
mosokwê - squinteyed person.
mosola - usefulness; profit. Mosomane n.c1.1A, mo-, Artesia, name of a village in Botswana with artesian wells.
mosopa - M0-, a bundle of biltong; a roll of cured strips of meat.
mososopa S - tall, narrow; imposing. Mosotho n.cL.1 mo-, siING.or Basotho, a national of Lesotho; one whose first language is Sesotho.
mosotli - a scoffer; a mocker. MOSU N.M0-, camel-thorn; Acacia giraffe; fibre is used for roofing and thatching, and for making kilts for the initiation ceremonies of both sexes.
mosuga - m0-, a small bundle, or parcel wrapped in leather material.
mosugi - m0-, a tanner; a carrier.
mosukê - penis.
mosukujane - m0-, same as mosukutswane and masukujwane, Lippisa jaranica; the leaves are infused and used as a drink for fevers; fever-tree; wild tea, used as a cure; wild mint.
mosukujane - /0-, same as mosukujwane.
mosukujwane - ™/0-, same as mosukujane.
mosum6 - m0-, the deep breathing of a sleeper; the noise made by wind or water; the hiss of a snake; a species of creeper.
mosupatsela - basupatsela show, and tsela, way; a guide; scout.
mosupi - witness; a witness.
mosupiwatsela - ™mo0-, point, and tsela, way, same as mosupatsela, a guide. Mosupologê n.same as Mantaga, Monday.
mosusu - (same as "susu"), Which is more commonly used, a deaf person. MOsuUSU N.a fixed handle of a pot; a poor, quality garment.
mosutlhalefaufau - astronaut.
moswagadi - and gadi (augmentatively), feminine stuff; a widow; a widower.
moswang - the contents of an animal's stomach.
moswaoeme - M0-, die, and eme, standing; a dead tree still standing.
moswaswe - M0-, similar to bonyênyê, a swarm of small ants.
moswêlatumêldê - ™0-, martyr.
moswele - famine; starvation of many people.
mosweleswele - (same as "mosweleswete"), a bird, found in thickets, that makes a noise like that of chopping. mosweleswete DIAL. VAR. oF mosweleswele. MOSWi N.™M0-, a dead person, a deceased; a corpse.
moswijane - used mainly as a apv.s. together; united.
motago - narcotic drug.
motagwa - (same as "letagwa"), which is more commonly used, a drunkard.
motagwi - ™mo-, same as motagwa and letagwa, which is more frequently used.
motako - crayon.
motakola - siING.oF metakola, blue guarri; bush guarri; Guarrile; Ebenaceae.
motang - in a young plant, the stem section as distinguished from the root section.
motatasêla - a palsied person.
motati - a woman's oak of hartebeest skins.
motatsana - m0-, same as thari, a skin in which a baby is carried on the back; a cradle.
motau - an old and emaciated dog. Motawana N.a member of the Tawana tribe.
moteb6 - thick grass growing by water.
moteka - probably a metathesis of mokete, a merry noise; a feast.
motêmê - m0-, can.
motenetso - m0-, pleats.
motenyane - ¢., a member of the finch, or thrush family; a high or treble voice.
motêtêsêl6 - palsy; rigor. Motewa N.sING.or Batewa [os]. one of the Batewa people.
mothaedi - (same as "moraedi"), a tempter; a trapper.
mothai - mothaisi is more frequently used, one who sets a trap.
mothaladi - sinc.or methaladi, a stripe in colours; a streak between ouds; a scrap of porridge left in a pot.
mothale - siING.or methale, a ass of things; a variety; a kind, or sort of thing; a Straight line made on the ground; a perpendicular stripe.
mothal6 - line.
mothalêtsepa - perpendicular.
mothama - a cheek; a mouthful of food; volume.
mothankgwe - a long range.
mothad - a foundation.
mothapiwa - ™0-, employee.
mothata - ™mo-, sinc.or bathata, same as mothati, a strong one; the mighty one.
mothata - include species of Cordia ovalis; Pappea capensis.
mothatha - siNc.or methatha, tall grass with red flowers and long leaves, found in pools.
mothati - frequently used referring to the Almighty, a strong person. Mothatiesi N.the Omnipotent one; the Almighty. Mothatiyotlhe N.power and yotlhe, all, the Almighty; God; the allpowerful.
mothaya-nonyane - ™70-, a fowler.
mothekga - (same as "lentabolê"), strips of skin hanging from a man's waist; a girdle.
motheledi - a survivor; one who has escaped from danger.
mothênêkê - sinc.or methênêkê, the narrow part of anything; a small-waisted person; something narrow in the middle, but large at both ends.
mothêd - a foundation; a plan.
mothepana - young girl.
mothibakgôr6 - goalkeeper.
mothibi - one who stops, or turns back animals.
mothikga - ornamental skin othes.
mothisa - a stripe; a weal.
motho - a person. ID. ExPR, motho ga a itsiwe e se naga.
mothobolodi - bathobolodi a pioneer.
mothokgami - an upright person.
mothopa - small boil.
mothosenna - a male; a male person.
mothosenyana - mo0-, senyana, a simpleton.
mothothi - (same as "moro"), gravy.
mothubi - a breaker.
mothudi - a smith; a repairer of shoes, etc.
mothugd - used mainly as a REL. Ss bad-tasting; metsi a mothugê, bad-tasting water.
mothuladilôtê - bathuladilêtê locksmith.
mothusi - a helper.
mothuthwa - (same as "motoutwane"), a species of moth, destructive to othing.
motiakone - a deacon [borrowed].
motik6 - a target, or mark to shoot at.
motile - (same as "motilatilane"), a shrub eaten by tortoises. prov., khudu e rile ntlha pula e ka na, ra a ja motilatile.
motimane - miser.
motimedi - a wanderer; a strayer.
motimêla - a charred piece of wood.
motimona - m0-, (FOR],a demon.
moting - a single male hartebeest.
motintinyane - mo0-, a tomtit.
motitswe - m0-, Same as moditswe, a small black lizard.
motlaagana - a temporary house; a house made of bushes; a tent; a tabernacle.
motladiki - a random speaker; one who speaks without thought.
motlae - m0-, joke.
motlakase - sSING.OF metlakase electricity.
motlalemetsi - (same as "mapulane"), a species of bush; Blumea gariepina.
motlamedi - ™mo-, tlamêla, a provider for the needs of others; one who cares for others.
motlameladilôt6 - (same as "bathuladilêtê"), locksmith.
motlang - m0-, DIAL. VAR. oF motang, which is more frequently used, the stalk of a bulb; the stem of a seedling.
motlapa - ™m0-, same as setshwakga, a lazy person or creature; a halfwitted person.
motlapele - #m0-, batlapele, come, and pele, first; a first-comer; a forebearer.
motlatlagwe - (same as "tlatlagwe"), black korhaan; Afroitis afra.
motlatsatona - deputy minister.
motlatsê - filling up.:.
motlele - thicksowing; overcrowded plants.
motletsetletse - fullness; abundance.
motlha - ™mo-, a time; a season; an era; date. Used as a REL.s, it signifies lukewarm, as in metsi a motlha, the water is lukewarm.
motlha mo - PHR. OR ADV. PHR. [D.], when.
motlha-opê - PHR, same as motlhamongwe maybe; perhaps; possibly.
motlhaba - sand; a sandy plain; a plain.
motlhabakgosi - the camel-thorn tree of Ngamiland; Acacia nilotica.
motlhabani - sinc.or batlhabani, a fighter; a soldier.
motlhabêg6 - metlhabêg leaven; encouragement.
motlhabeletsi - one who sets a tune; a presentor; the leading voice of a choral group.
motlhabê - a shoot; a sprout in growing grain.
motlhaedi - a failure; one who fails or comes short.
motlhafu - lower leg; calf.
motlhaga - person with a gap between the front teeth.
motlhagala - metlhagala species of mistletoe; infusion as tea.
motlhagare - jaw; molar tooth; toothache.
motlhaja - species of edible bush; Diospyros lycioides.
motlhaka - cou. a stalk as of corn, or maize; sedge.
motlhakana - sinc.or metlhakana, a species of small thin reed.
motlhakane - a locust ready for eating.
motlhakola - sinc.or metlhakola, a bush bearing black edible berries, like blackcurrants; Enclea sp.; bush grain; blue grain. Motlhakwa n.sinc.or Batlhakwa, a member of the Batlhakwa an; the Motlhakwa tree; Bequaertiodendron magalismontanum.
motihala - a spoor; a trail. 1b. Expr, motlhala wa motho ke molomo.
motlhale - sinc.or batlhale, same as motlhalefi, which is more commonly used, a wise person; a sly person.
motlhalefi - wise man.
motlhaletshwana - species of bush with dark, thick-set leaves and small black berries.
motlhalo - sinc.or metlhalo traditional doctor's fee.
motlhamongwe - PHR, same as motlhaopê perhaps; maybe; possibly.
motihana - the back of a person; the placenta of an animal.
motlhang - introduces a v.PHR,such as motlhang a gorogang, at the time when he arrives.
motlhanka - a servant.
motlhanogi - a turncoat.
motlhape - herd.
motlhapi - (same as "motlopi"), fruit used for preparing a drink.
motlhap6 - -, sinc.or metlhapêd, same as moroto, origin uncertain, could be urine; semen.
motlhatlei - sinc.or batlhatlei, tlhatlaya, one who starts che preparation of a meal, etc., by putting the pot on the fire.
motlhatlha - used mainly as a REL.s not nice; disagreeable.
motlhatlha-wa-dimo - a tree, or shrub burnt to treat lunatics.
motlhatlhaledi - lecturer.
motlhatlhe - oarse grass found in vleis and swamps.
motlhatlhobi - batlhatlhobi an inspector; an examiner.
motlhatsa - (same as "motlhatswa"), a plant used as an emetic; Ficus salicifolia. motlhatswa DIAL var. oF motlhatsa, same as motlhatsa.
motlhaye - black root; blue bush; monkey plum; poison peach; wild coffee; Ebenaceae.
motlhê - quick grass; doctor's wage before opening his bag.
motlhoafadi - a zealous person; an earnest person.
motlhobodika - metlhobodika same as motlhêbêlêk6, a large vent of an antheap.
motlhobogi - a despairer; a pessimist.
motlhôb616k6 - (same as "motlhobodika").
motlhodi - a maker; a creator.
motlhodi - (same as "setlhodi"), which is more frequently used, a spy; also one who tarries.
motlhodi - the eye of a fountain.
motlhofo - used mainly as a REL.S.,a weak one; an exhausted one; light in weight; frail; not heavy, or strong.
motlhofo - bo-, used mainly as a REL.s lightweight; easiness.
motlhogo - a cupping horn.
motlhoki - a needy person.
motlhokofatsi - a sadist; a tormentor.
motlhokolots6 - (same as "segwapa"), a strip of dried, or preserved meat; a piece of biltong.
motlhokomedi - prefect.
motlhêkêmêlabafofi - air hostess.
motlhêkêmêlamatlôtl6 - (same as "ramatlêtld"), accountant.
motlhokotlhokwi - a single lion.
motlholagadi - a widow, or widower.
motlholôê - a misfortune; a mysterious happening; an ominous happening.
motlhomedi - an armed person.
motlhono - species of thornbush; Maytenus heterophylla and Maytenus senegalensis.
motlhonwane - species of bush, or Maytenus tenuispina.
motlhopi - voter one who chooses.
motlhose - bateared fox; a kaross made of bat-eared foxes' skins.
motlhotlheletsi - mo0-, tlhotlheletsa, an instigator; a stirrer; one who incites another to action.
motlhêtlhê - sinc.or metlhdtlhd, a beer strainer.
motlhotsi - lame person; limping person. |.
motlhounamêla - a humble, or piteous beggar.
motlhuje - black root; blue bush; monkey plum; poison peach.
motlhwa - a white ant; a nest of white ants; quick grass.
motlhwaêla - a set of two, or three jackal, or bat-eared fox skins, Motlhware N.siNc.or Batlhware, a member of the Batlhware tribe.
motlôb6 - a pit, or quarry; a place where ay for pottery, or sebild, is dug; a storage place.
motlôb6 - quarry; store.
motlôb6-wa-dibuka - a library.
motlodi - a transgressor; a jumping jack.
motlodiwa - (same as "motlodiwi"), an anointed person.
motlodiwi - (same as "motlodiwa").
motlogolo - siNc.or batlogolo, also bomotlogolo, a nephew; a man's sister's child.
motlokolo - sinc.or metlokolo, goatskin apron, for girls and women worn over their buttocks.
motlopa - (same as "FOLL"),. euphemistic terms: nawa; lelengwana; sebete; setlopi, itoris.
motlopi - Boscia albitrunca; fruit used for preparing a drink; roots are pounded and used for making a hot drink; Cape bush, or shepherd tree.
motlop6 - a tortoiseshell; itoris.
motlotlegi - sinc.or batlotlegi, an honourable person; excellency, as a term of honour; the high commissioner.
motlotliwa - an honoured, or respected person.
motlotsedi - a pang; a sharp pain in the stomach; a labour pain.
motloutlê - metloutld anything upright, as a slab; a stone, or a tree; a pillar.
moto - (same as "mmoto"), which is more frequently used, the part below the anus.
motobetso - (same as "pOmpê and phaephe"), water tap; device through which water flows when plug is pressed.
motokolo - siING. oF metokolo, a species of tree; Arabian numnum.
motoloki - an interpreter [borrowed].
motomotsa - nakedness.
motontonyane - /0-, urinal; thin long bucket.
motoro - M0-, Same as mmotoro, a species of moth very destructive to hair and wool [borrowed].
motoroko - ™0-, prickly pear; cactus.
mototse - (soldier in the box); a species of wild fruit; Liliaceae.
mototwane - epilepsy; an epileptic fit.
motoutwane - a species of moth very destructive to othing.
motsaapene - ™m0-, erk.
motsadi - a parent.
motsalwapele - siING. oF batsalwapele bear, and pele, first, same as maitibolê, a first-born.
motsamai - a traveller.
motsamaê - gait; walk.
motšana - m0-, a species of wild vine.
motsantsabetsi - /0-, a ever workman.
motsaodi - wild plum; Lowveld mangosteen.
motsayadinopol6 - spy.
motsayamaêm6 - ™0-, successor in office.
motse - a village; a home; a homestead.
motsê - semen.
motsebe - (same as "motsebi"), a poisonous wild fig-tree; Eroton megalobotrys.
motsei - one who takes; hence one who takes a wife; a bridegroom.
motsekedi - a sling.
motsemošate - Mošate wa Botswana, Gaborone; refers to mosšate, capital ty; ty.
motsena - thin fermented porridge.
motsênêla - transgressor.
motsepani - mo0-, species of tree.
motsereganyi - ™mo-, same as motshereganyi, an umpire; a mediator; one who comes between; a peacemaker.
motset6 - traditional leather strip worn by men through loins and buttocks; napkins.
motsetseneki - a ever workman; a cunning workman.
motsetseni - ™mo-, a ever, or cunning workman.
motsetsi - (same as "motsetsi"), a woman in confinement; rubber hedge; mountain cabbage-tree.
motsha - the motsha tree; Acacia nilotica.
motšhaba - a species of wild fig; sycamore fig.
motšhaba - sycamore fig tree; Moreceae.
motshabi - a fugitive; a refugee.
motshameki - a player; a sportsman, a sportswoman.
motshamek6 - a game; a sport.
motšhantšha - metshantsha same as motšatsa, motshantsha, tree; Bauhinia partersiana.
motshe - a pestle; a stamping stick.
motshe - piston.
motshe-wa-godimo - (same as "mola-wa-badimo"), a rainbow.
motshedi - one who pours. Motshêganông N.the month of May.
motshegare - daytime; ranging from late morning till late afternoon.
motšhêg6 - diarrhoea.
motshelanoka - bridge.
motshêl6 - to have a calf every other year; to have a long interval between one calf and the next; a lottery, or fair in which members take turns in contributing towards the running costs.
motshereanyi - a charmer, as a snake charmer; one who fascinates, or makes stupid.
motshereganyi - (same as "motsereganyi"), an umpire.
motšhetšhedima - lane; traffic lane.
motšhi - the motshi tree; bean pods that are eaten by goats.
motshikiri - grass with thick handy stalks, used for thatch and brooms.
motšhinyane - a scar, from forehead to the bridge of the nose.
motshisa - ™o-, a stripe.
motshitshi - a 'swarm, as of bees.
motshodi - one who dishes up.
motshola - ™mo-, a carrier; one who takes hold of.
motsholetsi - one who lifts up.
motsholodi - a spiller; one who pours.
motshomilê - water running from the nose.
motshopha - (same as "motshofê").
motshêphê - a twisted rope; anything spiral; curls.
motšhosa - a single male hartebeest.
motshotêl6 - dry dung dust.
motšhêtlhê - sinc.or metshdtihd, a bush with edible berries; Rhus lancea; leptodictya; differences in the types of leaf and other formations are not significant.
motšhôtšh6 - sinc.or metshdtshd, a long strip of ground.
motšhêtšhônôn6 - ¢-, a comet.
motshuisi - a compensator.
motshwa - an itchy eruption.
motshwaiwa - a dedicated, set apart, or branded thing.
motshwanedi - batshwanedi 'shwanêla, a deserving one; a worthy one.
motshwareledi - secundus.
motshwari - a catcher; one who lays hold.
motshwarwa - similar to legolêgwa, same as motshwarwi, a captive; a prisoner.
motshwarwi - ™mo-, same as motshwarwa.
motshwêêtshwêê - scabies; eczema.
motsi - similar to mosi a day; a day when the time that.
motsiara - the motsiara tree.
motsietsegi - a deceived one; one who is gullible.
motsietsi - ™m0-, a deceiver; a deceitful person.
motsila - a dividing line; a division between rows; a gap in the ouds; a stripe on an animal; a plait of hair.
motsitla - porridge that is not well cooked. motsitsa s Rev. level; equal.
motsitsana - m0-, a gland; a small skin bag.
mots6 - used principally with numbers more than ten; a unit.
motsodutsokwane - a dust storm.
motsofe - an old person, or animal.
motsoko - (same as "motsokwe"), tobacco.
motsokodia - (same as "motsopodia"), used mainly as a REL.s., rcuitous; winding. prov., tsela e e motsokodia ga e latse nageng.
motsola - used mainly as a RELS. tastelessness.
motsôl6 - used mainly as a RELS. narrow, of a kaross; plot of ground, ete.
motsomi - ™m0-, ahunter. _.
motsosa - m0-, a reedbuck.
motsotso - MO0-, a minute.
motsotsojane - m0-, cross berry; Grewia retinervis; Tilianceae.
motsu - iM0-, Same as motswi, an arrow.
motsuolodi - a rebel.
motsutsu - m0-, Same as kamore and phaposi, a room.
motswa - m0-, urticaria rash.
motswaere wa pinagare - pylon.
motswais6 - m0-, come from, and isd, fireplace, a firebrand; a torch; a partially burnt stump; a piece of charred wood; a stick from yesterday's fire.
motswaitswai - species of herb that grows up to ten centimetres in length and has a salty taste.
motswak6 - mixture.
motswakêtshipi - /0-, alloy.
motswakwa - ™mo-, similar to mhaladi, foreigner.
motswalakgôrê - and kgorê, door, a bush bearing edible berries; Waltheria indica. Motswana N.™mo-, and Betswana, a national of the state of Botswana; a first language speaker of Setswana.
motswateng - 70-, come out and feng, depths, a foetus of a dead animal.
motswatlhapa - come from, and tlhapa, wash, young grass growing among the old.
motswatswa - ™mo-, a flatterer.
motswatswa - used mainly as a REL.s and as an 1p., a snow-white thing; spotless whiteness.
motswe - M0-, similar to modi, which is more frequently used. 1. EXPR, motswe wa noka, the sinew of the hip joint.
motswedi - a spring; a fountain.
motsweima - M0-, same as mokabaowane, klipspringer.
motswere - m0-, leadwood; Combretum imberbe; ebony. motswetswejane DIAL. VAR. OF motsotsojane, Cross berry.
motswi - (same as "motsu"), an arrow.
motu - wax for sealing leaks; old thick oil used to seal utensils; wax from imodka used as a sticky gum.
motubane - the motubane tree, used for making furniture; Dombeya rotundifolia.
motumoga - (same as "letimoga"), waterbuck; Kobus ellipsiprymnus.
motuuladi - a silent person.
motwane - leg of a calf; a grass that grows in vleis, etc.
mouba - (same as "moubêld"), a pair of bellows; a smith's fireplace.
moubêlê - - same as mouba.
mould - ¢-, mule; hybrid.
moumd6 - red leaved rock fig; its bark is used for rope making, and it bears edible berries; Ficus ingens and Ficus natlensis. mou6 DEMONS. LOC. FORM., DIAL. VAR. OF ™00-, which is more frequently used, that, or in that, which is nearest to the person spoken to.
moupeledi - one who doctors gardens.
moupi - one who doctors gardens, etc.
moup6 - doctoring gardens, domestic animal folds, etc. against any evil including wild beasts; traditional charms used to ensure safety from wild beasts.
mouputsa - m0-, light sandy soil; desert soil.
mouta - mould.
moutlwalê - a taste; a flavour.
moutlwi - a listener; an obedient one.
mouwane - M0-, same as mouwe.
mouwe - M0-, same as mouwane, fog; mist.
mouwêlôê - echo.
mowa - M0-, same as moya air; a spirit; a wind; a soul; breath.
mowafala - evaporate.
mowana - /M0-, a baobab tree; a cream of tartar tree.
mowetsi - ™0-, a finisher.
moya - (same as "mewa breath").
moyantlo - go to, and ntlo, hut, the younger brother who takes his deceased brother's widow (seyantlo) to raise a family for him, or to adopt the widow and the children.
moyoani - m0-, same as mobeane, and molebatsi, live-long bush. MPa N.-, a belly; a stomach. ID. EXPR., mpa ya lentswê, the middle of a hill; mpay ya lonao, the sole of a foot. pRov., seboba re bata sa mokwatla sa mpa re a mpampetsa.
mpa - %-, a lash; a cane; a switch; stick.
mpampeditse - has fumbled, or patted gently; has glossed over matter; has taken a light view of what would otherwise be a serious matter.
mpampeditswe - has been fondled, or patted gently; has been glossed over, as a matter.
mpampediwa - (same as "mpampetswa"), being fondled, or patted gently; being glossed over, as a matter.
mpampetsa - pat gently; gloss 'over a matter; take a light view of what would otherwise be a serious matter. Prov. seboba re bata sa mokwatla sa mpa re a mpampetsa.
mpaola - ¢., brazier [borrowed].
mpapa - vulva.
mpe - S., used with nouns of class 9; bad; ugly. mpepi INrEJ, Same as mpepu, said to a baby when coaxing it to be carried on the back.
mphetšhane - %-, sandals.
mphê - a gift; talent.
mpolokwane - a necklace; a chain ornament.
mpopi - doll.
mpête - a kind of strong honey-beer.
mubu - dwarf datepalm; feather-palm; wild date-palm; Arecaceae.
mumuga - become uprooted or thinned out.
mumugile - has become uprooted or thinned out.
mumula - uproot, so as to thin out; thin out growing grain; uproot or chop.
mumutse - has uprooted.
muna - similar to mina, trickle through as water through a strainer; suck up water with a reed; suck anything into the mouth; drain, as a liquid.
munnê - has sucked up water with a reed, etc.
munwa - being sucked up, as water with a reed; being strained (liquid) of solid matter by passing through a sieve or other porous thing.
mupaphiri - small leafed, strong-smelling evergreen bush, with flattish edible berries.
musi - (same as "mosi smoke").
mutlha - pick threads, as from an old garment; shred, as wool from a bundle; bite chunk off.
mutlhamutlha - as sticks for a bundle, or heads of corn for cooking.
mutlhêga - become shredded as wool from a garment.
mutlhegile - has become shredded, as wool from a garment.
mutlhile - as from an old garment; has shredded as wool from a bundle.
mutlhisa - help to shred.
mutlhisitse - has helped to shred.
mutlhisitswe - has been helped to shred.
mutlhisiwa - (same as "mutlhiswa"), being helped to shred.
mutlhiwa - being shredded.
mutlwa - m0-, same as mimutlwa, mmitlwa, miitlwa, a thorn.
mutlwane - m0-, a snare; a trap with a beam.'.
