na - ASSOC. FORM., ba na le pitse, they have a horse; ba na le pitse, they own (possess) a horse.
na - which in the prr. becomes ne, as ino na a bona, he saw; o ne a bêna, he was seeing.
naalana - give to each other.
naalanye - have given to each other.
naana - s., red-brown and white markings on a cow; the markings may be large bold white ones on a background of other colours or there may be more white than any other colour.
naana - (same as "naalana"), give to each other.
naba - (same as "ngaba"), withhold, or keep back milk, as a cow; refuse to speak, or relate news.
nabê - aDv. signifies the person, or thing in conjunction, or in association with an action; with them, used with nouns and pronouns of CL. 2 AND 2A.
naê - ADV. signifies the person, or thing connected, or associated with an action; with him/her, used with nouns and pronouns of CL. 1 AND 1A.
nafe - a point; a tip; an end; an apex; a side.
naga - a field; a portion of land; a farm; the veld; the countryside.
nagana - (same as "akanya"), think.
naka - one of the bright early morning stars, appears before dawn towards the end of May. It is a sign of the onset of the coldest time of the year, and also signals that it is time for the goats to breed.
naka - (same as "lonaka"), a pipe; the pipe of a dagga smoker.
nakaladi - a species of edible bulb.
nakalala - come clearly into view.
nakale - (same as "ngakale"), and kwakwaêlêlê, the staff on a spear; a forked stick for holding down bushes.
nakaletse - has come clearly into view.
nakedi - 9N-, a polecat.
nakê - a time; an hour.
nakê ¢ e fetileng - past time.
nala - s., red-brown markings on an ox; the markings may be large bold white ones on a background of brown, or other colour, or there may be more white than any other colour. 1p. Expr, go ja nala, to visit; gad about town.
nalanala - wander around, as an idle person; gad about.
naledi - a star.
nalê - ADV. signifies the person, or thing connected, or associated with an action, used with nouns and pronouns of cL.s AND 11.
nama - meat; flesh; it is also used for private parts of the human body; muscles.
nama - presently; just now; by and by; in a little while; afterwards.
nama - spread out; stretch oneself, as in sleep.
nama ee sele - superfluous flesh.
namagadi - a female, used of animal. mw. EXPR, pelo namagadi, tender-heartedness.
namaladitse - has caused to lie stretched out.
namalala - lie stretched out.
namalatsa - cause to lie stretched out; sew with big stitches, or stitches far apart.
namaletse - has lain stretched out.
namane - a calf. iw. EXPR, namane e tona, used to denote anything exceedingly big; foetus.
nameditse - has encouraged; has consoled.
namêla - stretch a leg out in front of; spread, as forest fire, etc. in the direction of.
namêla - (same as "mameêla"), ride; climb.
namele - a species of creeping grass.
nametsa - (same as "nametsha"), encourage; console.
nametse - has ridden; has climbed; has stretched a leg out in front of.
nametsêga - be encouraged; be comforted.
nametsêg6 ABST - 9N-, consolation; encouragement.
nametsha - (same as "nametsa"), encourage; console.
nametso ABST - 9N-, consolation.
namile prt - finally; in a little while the result showed.
namoga - draw in, after being stretched out, as a leg.
namogêla - draw in, after being stretched out, as a leg to the benefit of another.
namogile - has drawn in, after being stretched out, as a leg.
namola - help, or rescue something.
namologa - cease spreading out; cease stretching oneself, and especially one's legs.
namologêla - 7amologa, cease stretching one's legs for the benefit of someone else.
namologile - has ceased spreading out; has ceased stretching one's legs; has got up from a position lying stretched out on the ground.
namolola - lift up something stretched out; rev.,the position of a thing stretched out.
namolotsê - has lifted something stretched out.
namoneite - 1A¢-, SING. [FOR.], dinamoneite lemonade.
nampi - ADV.,same as nampo; kampo; ampo; perhaps.
nampo - ADV.,same as nampi, kampo; ampo; perhaps.
namune - orange.
nana - used mainly as a REL.s.to denote young; tender.
nannabeditse - has walked carefully; was polite.
nano - EXPR, Of rising up instantly from a sitting posture.
nanoga - EXPR, 7ano, rise from a sitting position; run fast.
nanogêla - rise from a sitting position; go, or set out in a hurry to some place.
nanogile - has risen from a sitting position and gone.
nanola - EXPR, 7ano, lift up; help to rise from a sitting position.
nanologa - rise from lying at full length.
nanologile - has risen up from lying at full length. Nanosa v.s.CAUus. < nanola, cause to rise; hasten.
nanositse - has caused to rise.
nanositswe - has been caused to rise; has been hurried.
nanosiwa - being caused to rise.
nantsê - has walked with difficulty, as a sick person.
nanya - as a sick person.
nao - ADV., similar to le wêna, signifies the person or things connected or associated with an action; with you, used with nouns and pronouns of cL.1AND1 < A].
nape - ¢-, one of the chiefs of the initation ceremony who impersonates a diety; one who speaks with the gods; the demi-god of wisdom; a divine being.
nare - a buffalo.
narikisi - naartjie [borrowed].
nasê - ADV., SING. the thing connected or associated with an action; with it, used with.
natefa - be pleasing; be pleasant; become pleasant; become sweet.
natefêla - be pleasing to.
natefêl6_ - 9N-, something pleasing.
natefêlwa - be pleased by; have pleasure in.
natefesitswe - has been made pleasing, sweet.
natefetse - was pleasing to.
natefetswe - was pleased by; had had pleasure in.
natefisa - (same as "natetsha sweeten"),; make pleasant; make more pleasing.
natefisitse - has made (something) pleasing, sweet.
natefisiwa - being made pleasing, sweet; delightful, etc.
natef6 - enjoyment.
natetsha - (same as "natefisa sweeten"),; make pleasant; make more delightful.
natetshetsa - make pleasant for.
natetshitse - has made pleasant.
natetshiwa - (same as "natetshwa"), being made pleasant.
natha - (same as "ngatha"), pilfer food; take a little food out of a dish, etc.; break off a bit with the fingers, or with the teeth.
nathaka - pilfer food extensively. nathêga_v.s.NeuT., capable of being broken off into bits with the fingers, or with the teeth; become chipped.
nathêla - give a bit of something to someone else.
nathisa - help to break off a bit with the fingers, or teeth.
nathisitse - has caused to break a bit off with the fingers, or teeth.
nathisitswe - has been caused, or helped to break off with the fingers, or teeth.
nathisiwa - being caused, or helped to break a bit off with the fingers, or teeth.
nathiwa - as a morsel of food.
natlafaditse - has caused to be courageous; has caused to be meticulous.
natlafala - be courageous; be manly; play the game.
natlafal6 - 9N-, courage; meticulousness; the act of hard work.
natlafatsa - cause to be courageous; cause to be meticulous. natlafetse v#®.prT. < natlafatsa, has become courageous, or meticulous.
nat6 - edible grub which feeds on monato or acacia leaves.
nato - EXPR, catch, or seize instantaneously.
natoga - become caught; be seized.
natola - to catch, or seize without any difficulty; nab; snatch.
natolwa - being seized, or caught with ease.
natotsê - has seized, or caught with ease.
natotswê - has been nabbed, or snatched.
natsê - ADV., similar to Je tsônê, used with.
nouns and pronouns of - AND 10, signifies things connected, or associated with an action; with them.
nawa_ - a bean; a pea; itoris.
naya - give; present; offer.
nay6 - ADV. similar to le yênê, used with nouns and pronouns of ct.9., signifies the thing connected, or associated with an action; with it.
neencane - (same as "mmyenyane neuncu"), or ncuncwane, signifies smallness in size.
neuncu - (same as "wnyennyane ncuncwane"), or ncencane, signifies smallness in size.
ncuncwane - (same as "mnyennyane neuncu"), or ncencane, signifies smallness in size. nê ENCLITIC, used with forms that are interrogative, and adds emphasis to the question, o dirang nê? what are you doing?.
nê NUM - s., fourth; four times.
ne PFT - Similar to 70, was, or were; re ne re gama, we were milking.
ne ne - PHR expression used in idioms, at this time. Fa e bo ne ne, if by this time or at this time. E bo ne ne is equivalent to should. Motho e bo e le eng ka o bo ne ne o mo gopola? What is man that you should be mindful of him?.
nêêla - similar to faa, give to; hand over, or pass to one.
nêêlêla - 7êêla, ask someone to convey a message to another; cast an evil spell on.
nêêlêla - 1êêla, similar to tlhdlêla, bring evil upon by cursing; wish evil upon; curse.
nêêlêlwa - similar to tlhdlêlwa being cursed; being wished evil.
neeletse - has brought evil upon a person; has wished evil upon.
neeletswe - evil has been brought upon a person; a spell has been cast upon. nêêl6_N.CL.9N-, DER. F. Naya, similar to nêd, a dedication; a presentation.
nêêlwa - being given to.
neetse - has given.
neetswe - has been given to.
nêga - be at rest. 1D. EXPR, go nêga pelo the heart is at rest.
nêgile - was at rest.
neile - has given.
neilwe - has been given.
nêla_ - rain on.
nelê - has rained.
nêlwa - being rained on. 1D. ExPR go nêlwa ke pula.
nemeru - S., pregnant, used for animals; means also the first month of pregnancy; dusa refers to the whole time.
nenebu - a very large serpent.
neneke - a notch ona stick or riem.
nenekeditse - has used carried, or driven carefully, as of anything that could have been spilled, or endangered; that goes for a matter under consideration.
nenekeditswe - has been used, handled, carried, or driven carefully.
nenekediwa - (same as "neneketswa"), being used, carried or driven carefully, as anything that may be spilled, or endangered.
neneketsa - use, carry, or drive, carefully as anything that may be spilled, or endangered.
neneketswa - (same as "nenekediwa"), being used, carried, or driven carefully, as anything that may be spilled, or endangered.
nenesa - hold a thing slightly.
nenesêla - do a thing quickly; move quietly, as a vehicle on a smooth road.
nenesêl6 - a thing done quickly; smooth and gentle movement.
nenesetse - has done a thing quickly.
nenesitse - has held a thing slightly.
nêd - a gift of any description; a donation; a present; talent.
nêpa - aim accurately, as does a marksman; be correct.
nepakgolo - %-, precision. nêpêga _V.S.NEUT, be aimed at accurately; capable of being accurately aimed at.
nepile - has aimed accurately at, as a marksman.
nepisa - cause, or help to aim accurately at.
nepisitse - has caused, or helped to aim accurately.
nepisiwa - Šs. < nepisa, being caused, or helped to aim accurately.
nêpO - ABS.N. CL. 9N-, DER. F. nêpa, marksmanship; accuracy.
nesa - cause to rain.
neseditse - has caused to rain upon; has brought to rain upon.
nesediwa - (same as "nesetswa being caused to rain upon"),; being brought rain.
nesetsa - cause to rain upon; bring rain upon.
nesetswa - (same as "nesediwa").
nesitse - has caused to rain.
nesitswe - has been caused to rain.
netla - make right, or straight; do a little work.
netlêla - make right, or straight for; do a little work for.
netlile - has made right, or straight, as a little work.
netlisa - cause, or help to do a little work; cause, or help to adjust a matter.
newa - being rained upon.
nêwa - (same as "neiwa"), being given; being given to. neye sUBIUNCT. < maya, used in the expression of polite commands and exhortations; may give; please give.
ngaba - (same as "aba"), refuse to grow; withhold, or keep back milk, as a cow; refuse to speak, or relate news.
ngabanya - keep withholding milk, as a cow; ceaselessly refuse to speak, or relate news.
ngabaola - knock one about, as with a knobkerrie.
ngabaotsê - has knocked one about, as with a knobkerrie.
ngadile - has become peevish, or sulky.
ngadisa - cause to become peevish, or sulky.
ngadisitse - has caused to become peevish, or sulky.
ngadisitswe - has been caused to become peevish, or sulky.
ngadisiwa - (same as "ngadiswa being caused to become peevish"), or sulky.
ngadiswa - (same as "ngadisiwa").
ngadiwa - being peevish, or sulky.
ngaêla - cry as a jackal for.
ngaêlana - as if in intense pain.
ngaetse - has cried as one in intense pain for; has cried as a jackal for.
ngaile - as a jackal; has cried as in intense pain.
ngaisa - as a jackal; cause to cry as one in intense pain.
ngaisitse - has caused to cry, as a jackal; has caused to cry as one in intense pain.
ngaka - a doctor; a witchdoctor; a physician; one who holds the highest university degree in any faculty.
ngaka ya sedupe - tsa didupe, a magician; a doctor who diagnoses through smelling things out.
ngakalala - to stretch and strain as one pulling a heavy load.
ngakale - a forked staff or stick for holding down bushes.
ngakaletse - has become stretched and strained in every muscle.
ngakwa - be constipated.
ngala - become peevish, or sulky; refuse to speak, or relate news; have the sulks.
ngalê - drink the contents of a container in one go.
ngale - a dwelling on the side of a hill; a hollow in the veld with bushes, or trees growing in it.
ngalêla - despise, or reject through disinclination; refuse to associate with another.
ngalêla - ExPR. galê! to drink and drain the contents of a container in one go.
ngalêlana - refuse to associate with each other. ngalê aBsN.cL.9N-, Sulkiness; obstreperousness; the act of being sulky.
ngaloga - become disobedient; be stubborn; refuse to do anything; become lawless; become delinquent.
ngalogêla - become disobedient about or to; be stubborn, etc.
ngalogile - has become stubborn, etc.
ngalosa - cause to be lawless; make disobedient, etc.
ngalositse - has caused to be lawless, etc.
ngalosiwa - being caused to be lawless.
ngama - dip a sponge in; absorb with a sponge.
ngamana - (same as "ngaparagana and mataragana"), stick, or adhere together, as glued boards, etc.
ngamantse - has caused to stick, or adhere together, as glued boards, etc.
ngamanya - caused to stick or adhere together, as glued boards, etc.
ngamanye - has held fast, as a rusty lock.
ngamê - ¢., a stingy and mean Or parsimonious person.
ngami - a sponge; young tush, or inside bark chewed into a spongelike mass and used to suck up milk etc.; any absorbent material.
ngamisitse - has softened food by dipping it into a liquid; has caused to stick, or adhere.
ngamodisa - help, or cause to stretch out.
ngamoga - become stretched, as a wet skin, or as elastic; have abdominal distension.
ngamogêla - become stretched towards, or for.
ngamogile - is stretched out as a wet skin; has become stretched out, as a wet skin.
ngamola - stretch out, as a wet skin; make taut, as elastic.
ngamolêla - stretch out towards.
ngamotsê - has stretched out as a material, cloth, etc.
ngamotswê - has been stretched out, as a wet skin.
nganagana - become interlaced, as the small branches of a tree; become hooked into each other, as the fingers of both hands.
nganaganye - have become interlaced, as the small branches of a tree, etc.
nganga - argue with; dispute over; nag.
ngangaba - be on the verge of crying.
ngangabeditse - (same as "nxanxabeditse"), DER. F.THEINTERJ. < 1Xa nxanxa, has made a clicking noise to calm a domestic animal; has made a clicking noise when passing another person as a sign of respect, deferring to, or asking for an apology, with the force of 'excuse me'.
ngangabetsa - < 71Xanxa-nxa, same as nxanxabetsa, make a clicking noise to calm a domestic animal; make a clicking noise when passing another person as a sign of respect, deference, or when asking for an apology; has the force of "excuse me.'.
ngangabisitse - has caused to feel like crying.
ngangabisitswe - has been caused to feel like crying.
ngangabisiwa - being caused to feel like crying.
ngangabologa - become bloated, or swollen, as an expanding bladder.
ngangabologile - has become bloated, or swollen, as an expanding bladder.
ngangabolola - similar to ngamola stretch that which is elastic; cause that which is elastic to stretch.
ngangabolosa - cause to become bloated or inflated, as an expansible thing.
ngangabolositsê - has caused to become inflated, as a balloon.
ngangabolositswe - < ngangabolositse has been caused to become inflated, as a balloon.
ngangabolosiwa - being caused to become inflated.
ngangabolotsê - has caused to become bloated, inflated or swollen, as an expansible thing.
ngangabolotswê - has been caused to become bloated, inflated, or swollen, as an expansible thing.
nganganyêga - whoop.
ngangaolêga - disappeared, as water ina lake.
ngangaolêgile - has disappeared, as water in a lake.
ngangarala - make a clicking noise.
ngangêla - or about.
ngangile - has argued, or disputed.
ngangisa - cause to argue, or dispute. ngangisana vV.s.REC. < ngangisa, argue with one another; dispute with each other.
ngangisanye - have argued with one another; have disputed with each. other.
ngangisitse - has caused to argue, or dispute.
ngangisiwa - /gangisa, Same as ngangiswa, has made to argue; being argued with.
ngangiswa - (same as "ngangisiwa").
ngangiwa - being disputed; being argued.
nganka - as a short-legged man; waddle.
ngankile - < has waddled; has walked in a waddling fashion.
ngantsê - has become stiff, or unyielding, as clay.
nganya - be stiff, or unyielding, as clay.
ngaola - be unco-operative; pull in an opposite direction to the rest; miaow pitifully.
ngaêtsê - has struggled in an attempt to free oneself.
ngapa - as a thorn, a cat, or an angry child; pinch with the nails; aw as a leopard.
ngapadile - has held fast (rarely used).
ngapadisa - cause to hold fast.
ngapadisitse - has caused to hold fast.
ngapadisitswe - has been caused to hold fast.
ngapadisiwa - being caused to hold fast.
ngapadiwa - being held fast.
ngapaka - scratch, or pinch all over, or a lot.
ngapakile - has scratched, or pinched all over.
ngapakilwe - has been scratched, or pinched all over.
ngapala - hold fast (rarely used).
ngapana - scratch, or pinch one another.
ngapane - have scratched, or pinched one another.
ngaparêla - eave to; eave to by taking hold of; take fast hold; persevere. ngaparêlana Vv.s.REC. < ngaparêla, eave to each other; stick together.
ngaparetse - has cleaved to; be stuck to; has held fast.
ngapêga - be scratchable; be pinchable; be scratched, or pinched easily.
ngapêla - scratch, or pinch for.
ngapile - has scratched, or pinched.
ngapisitse - has caused to be scratched, or pinched.
ngapisitswe - has been caused to be scratched, or pinched.
ngapisiwa - being caused to be scratched, or pinched.
ngapiwa - (same as "ngatswa"), being scratched, or pinched.
ngaporola - (same as "ngaporolola"), cast off; to unstick; unpaste.
ngaporologa - as something pasted on to another thing.
ngaporolola - (same as "ngaporola").
ngaporolotsê - has unsiuck that which was pasted or glued.
ngaro - EXPR, scratch with the nail, or sharp object instantaneously.
ngaroa - run, or gallop, as a wildebeest.
ngaroditse - (same as "ngarotsê has scratched with the nails").
ngaroditswe - (same as "ngarotswê"), has been scratched with the nails.
ngarotsa - scratch with the nails.
ngarotsê - (same as "ngaroditse").
ngata - a bundle; a bound-up package.
ngata - strike hard with something; strike so as to stun; strike, as a sudden illness.
ngatagantsê - has lain flat on the ground; has crouched; has caused to hit each other at great speed.
ngataganya - lie flat on the ground; crouch; cause to hit each other at great speed, hence great force.
ngatana - «Ec, strike each other hard with something.
ngatane - have struck each other hard with something.
ngateditswe - lifted up, or shaken a spear, or shield.
ngatêga - faint; be stunned; fall down, as if dead; capable of being hit, as with a stone.
ngategile - has fainted; be stunned, etc.
ngatetsa - a spear, etc. over one's head; prance about shaking a spear or shield, or both.
ngatha - (same as "natha"), pilfer or take _ bits of food out of a dish; break off small bits of anything.
ngathagantsê - (same as "ngathogantsê"), has broken off into small pieces, as bread, etc.
ngathaganya - (same as "ngathoganya break into small pieces"), as bread, etc.
ngathogantsê - (same as "ngathagantsê"), which is less frequently used. a.
ngathoganya - (same as "ngathaganya"), which is less frequently used.
ngati - small bowel; duodenum; meant to be eaten by women when a cow or ox has been slaughtered; pancreas.
ngaya - cry, as a jackal; cry as in intense pain; cry as one caught and held fast.
ngoba - < Je-, same as ntshwê, sweet reed.
ngôba - to set out in the afternoon.
ngdbeditse - has subsided; has kept back, or abstracted something, as part of a payment.
ngobêla - subside; become small as a sack from which grain has been taken.
ngobetsa - cause to subside; purloin; keep back, or abstract something, as part of a payment.
ngêbêta - walk proudly, as a lion; walk in a mincing manner.
ngobotile - as a lion.
ngodia - distress; wear out.
ngodiêga - be thoroughly weary and prostrate; be disheartened and prostrate; be distressed; lose zeal; be despondent.
ngodiegisa - make weary and prostrate; cause to be disheartened and prostrate.
ngodiegisitse - has made weary and prostrate; has caused to be disheartened and prostrate.
ngodiêgê - 9N-, despondency; discouragement.
ngodile - is wet, as ground after rain.
ngodisa - soften, or weaken the heart; make humble or humiliate; make miserable.
ngodisitse - has moistened; has softened.
ngodisiwa - being softened.
ngoditse - has broken, or ground very small or fine. ngdgatlola abv. ort, same as ngwagatlola, two or three years ago; the year before last.
ngOgwê - a species of shrub, from the juice of which Bushmen extract poison for their arrows. Legend has it that it is the fabulous medicine with which baboons doctored the hyena.
ngêka - ider a person; think upon; attend to; favour, or be favourable to; have q friendly interest in; render friendly offices to.
ngêkana - favour each other; induce or interest one another in; attract each other.
ngdkanye - have showed favour to each other; have induced, or interested one another in.
ngokile - < has considered a person; has thought upon; has attended to.
ngôla - be wet, as a skin in braying, or ground after soaking rain.
ngôl6 - moisture; wetness.
ngolo - s., denotes a male goat or donkey with a hide that is nearly all black, but has brown streaks or marks, particularly on head, underparts, or legs.
ngoloa - soften, as food.
ngoloile - has softened, as food.
ngolwana - s, denotes a female goat or donkey with a hide that is nearly all black, but has brown streaks or marks, particularly on head, underparts, or legs.
ngomaêla - be economical; be frugal, or thrifty.
ngomael6 - 9N., used mainly as an apv.s economy; economically; sparingly.
ngomaetse - has become economical; has become frugal.
ngomana - have urinary stricture; close in.
ngomane - has had urinary stricture; has closed in.
ngomêla - become smaller.
ngometse - has shrunk; has become smaller.
ngomoga - become cast down; become contrite; despair.
ngomogile - is cast down; was contrite.
ngomola - cause to be cast down; cause to despair. 1p. Expr, go ngomola pelo, to make exceedingly sorrowful.
ngomola - unbutton.
ngomotsa - to excite pity, or pathos.
ngomotsê - has caused to be cast down.
ngôna - restrain oneself from answering. ngôna pelo v.pur, shut up the heart; refuse to give help.
ngongagana - become helpless, or doubled up.
ngongaganye - has become helpless.
ngongobala - become silent.
ngongobetse - has become.
ngongodile - ê, has derided; has spoken sarcastically, or ironically.
ngongola - deride; gibe; taunt; speak sarcastically, or ironically.
ngongol6 - a gibe; a taunt.
ngOngOra - 9N-, complaint; discontent; a cause for complaint; a cause for discontent.
ngOngorêga - grumble; murmur; complain.
ngongorêgaka - murmur, or complain excessively.
ngdngoregetse - has grumbled; murmured, etc., about.
ngongoregile - has grumbled; murmured; complained.
ngongoregisa - cause to grumble murmur, or complain; give cause for fault finding.
ngongoregisitse - has caused to grumble, etc.
ngongêregisiwa - being caused to grumble, etc.
ngongoregiwa - being grumbled about.
ngongorêgd - 9N-, a complaint.
ngongotsê - (same as "ngongodile"), has derided; has spoken sarcastically, or ironically.
ngongwaêla - (same as "ngwangwaêla disappear on the quiet"), or secretly; leave or join others secretly; appear suddenly, no one knowing how, used of persons.
ngongwaêlêla - or away from.
ngongwaetse - has disappeared on the quiet, or secretly.
ngonnê - has restrained oneself from answering.
ngonti - 9N-, a haven; a creek; a bênd in a hill; a bend in a river bank; a cover or recess in a house; an alcove.
ngopa - be barren, used of animals.
ngôpê - purpura; epistaxis; bleed from the mouth, nose or throat; onyalai.
ngdsedisa - cause to be loath or sluggish.
ngOsedisitse - has caused to be loath.
ngdsedisiwa - being caused to be loath.
ngOsêla - 1gdsê, be slow or sluggish; be loath to do a thing; go or do unwillingly.
ngdsêlaka - be loath to do this and that or anything; show great unwillingness to act.
ngoêsêlêla - be loath about; fade away.
ngoseletse - has become slow or sluggish; has become loath to do a thing.
ngosetse - has become slow, or sluggish; has done unwillingly.
ngota - break, or snap off a branch, a stick, etc.
ngotêlêla - break or snap branches into pieces, or into short lengths.
ngoteletse - has broken branches into pieces.
ngotile - has broken or snapped off a branch or stick, etc.
ngotla - make small; cause to decrease.
ngôtlafaditse - has caused to be humble.
ngotlafala - become humble; become small; be humiliated.
ngotlafatsa - cause to become small, or humble; humiliate.
ngotlafetse - has become humble; has become small.
ngotiaka - cause to decrease considerably.
ngotlêga - become decreased; become less.
ngotlegile - has decreased; be lowly in mind, or estate.
ngotlêla - give less of to.
ngotlile - has made small; has caused to decrease.
ngotlilwe - has been made small.
ngotliwa - (same as "ngdtlwa"), being made small.
ngôtld - %-, dingêtldê, diminution. ngotlwa_v.s. pass, same as ngoftliwa, being made small.
ngotsa - break, or grind, very small.
ngOtwane - ¢e-,a plant with scented poisonous flowers; a tributary of the Limpopo River.
ngunanguna - %-, mumbling.
ngwaba - set out on a journey in the afternoon.
ngwabile - has set out on a journey in the afternoon.
ngwaêla - or some other instrument, when braying; scratch, particularly the back, of another.
ngwaetse - has rubbed a skin with a stone, or a tooth, or some other instrument, when braying. Nngwaga N.CL.9N-, AND 14¢-, SING. < dingwaga and bongwaga, a year.:.
ngwagakgolo - 99-, century.
ngwageng - oFT.,three years ago.
ngwaho - hear! hear!.
ngwakge - 9N-, same as ngwakhe, a catch, or button; something with which to fasten.
ngwakhe - (same as "ngwakge").
ngwak6 - a charmed life; one treated against evils; also a child whose parents had to go to a doctor so that the mother could conceive.
ngwalala - be absent a long time.
ngwale - ¢-, a girl who has reached the stage of entering into the initiation rites for females; a novice in the puberty ceremony; a virgin.
ngwaletse - has been absent a long time.
ngwana - < mo-, a child; a stepchild.
ngwana wa bokgopu nom - pHR.,a bastard child.
ngwana wa ngwakôê Nom - PHR, a child with a charmed life.
ngwanagana - dry or shrivel up, as a starving person. ngwanaganye vV.s. PFT. < ngwanagana, has dried or shrivelled up, as a starving person.
ngwanaka - my child (used when speaking to).
ngwanakê - 1Ae., my child (used when speaking of).
ngwanamakê - cat. Ngwanatsêlê N.., November.
ngwang - similar to mohêrê, weeds or long grass, hindering growth.
ngwangwaêla - (same as "ngongwaêla disappear on the quiet"), or secretly.
ngwangwaya - dig, or till; repeatedly; little by little.
ngwanyana - < mo-, a little child, frequently used to mean a girl.
ngwa6 - culture and tradition.
ngwatha - (same as "ngatha"), pilfer; steal a little food, ete.
ngwat6 - the undercut of a sirloin; the meat of the flank.
ngwaya - scratch the body when itching.
ngwayangwaya - scratch the body, on and off, when itching; dig or till, particularly with a rough instrument.
ngwedi - the moon; moonlight.
ngwêga - abscond; run away secretly; go away without notice.
ngwêgaka - run away secretly, often; go away without permission.
ngwêgêla - or to.
ngwegile - has absconded; has run away secretly.
ngwegisa - cause, or help to abscond.
ngwegisana - help each other to abscond.
ngwegisantsê - have helped each other to abscond.
ngwegisitse - has caused, or helped te abscond.
ngwene - a sore place.
ngwetsi - < mo-, a daughterin-law.
nhê - a yellowish rock squirrel.
nitama - be firm; be at ease; do well.
nitame - has become firm; has done well.
nitamisa - cause to be firm or straight.
nitamisitse - has made firm solid, or upright.
nitamisiwa - being made firm, solid, or straight in behaviour.
nka - v.ForM, same as ke ka, signifies ability to; willingness by the speaker; potential; ability or volition to do by the speaker. Ke ka kwala /nka kwala, I can write. Note that the nis first person formative equal to I.
nka bo - v.PHR, same as ke ka bo or ke ka be it is a way of expressing conditional mood situations like I could; I might; I should; I ought. 1p. ExPR. go ja nkabo, to steal and eat on the sly. prov. Modimo ga o je nka bo; God is not partial. nke Avx. v.FoRM.,same as ke ke, as innke ke tsamaye, let me go; exhort oneself to go; politely command oneself.
nke NEG - V. FoRM. same as ke ke, as innke ke tsamayê, may or may not go. nkêla _v.s. APPL. g0 on my behalf.
nketsonketso - t. 9n.,etsa, imitation in dealings.
nkga - smell; sniff; emit odour; inhale.
nkgaka - smell a lot.
nkgana - refuse one/me; reject me.
nkgana - sniff at each other.
nkgêla - sniff at; smell for.
nkgetse - has sniffed for; has stunk for.
nkgile - has smelled, or sniffed.
nkgisa - pollute.
nkgisitse - has caused an odour or a smell.
nkgisiwa - (same as "nkgiswa being caused to smell"),; being polluted.
nkgiwa - being smelled.
nkg6 - a water pitcher; a big water pot made of earth.
nkgodi - + N.A0-, bonkgodi, same as mankgodi, yellow billed kite.
nkgolole - an elder, same as nkgonne and nkgonone, my elder brother; my elder sister; my elder brother-in-law; my elder sister-inlaw.
nkgonne - 1A¢-, same as nkgolole and nkgonone, more frequently used.
nkgonone - (same as "nkgolole and nkgonne").
nkgotuwê - 9v-, hard black gum, including that of the mimosa tree.
nkgwana - a small water pitcher.
nkgwê - s, denotes white mixed with another colour; something like bokgwêba but rather more distinct, used only of male animals; the term for female is kgwana.
nkgwedi - ¢-, siING. oF bonkgwedi and N. same as nkgodi and mankgodi, yellow billed kite.
nkile prr - v. PHR, same as ke kile, I once; I once upon a time; I used to.
nkê - a nose; a nostril.
nkoko - (same as "nkuku grandmother").
nkokwane - ¢-, a kind of string instrument.
nkopane - ¢-, same as silantope, a small black ant with a very painful bite.
nku - a sheep.
nkukuw - ¢-, same as nkoko, grandmother.
nkwai - a plant with an edible bulb called kgogo, and sour edible leaves.
nkwê - a tiger; a leopard.
nna CL.1AND 1A - I; me.
nna - Sit down; stay; dwell; live; occupy; inhabit; be.
nnaka - ¢-, my younger brother; my younger sister (used in addressing).
nnakê - ¢-, my younger brother; my younger sister (used in addressing).
nnalana - be close together, as neighbours; live peaceably with one another.
nnalanye - have become close in their dealings as neighbours; have lived peaceably with one another.
nnana - ¢-, baby; little one, used as a term of endearment.
nnana - %-, be lame; be paralysed.
nnanneditse - has shifted about while sitting; shifting about while sitting.
nnannetsa - shift about while sitting.
nnê - s., used with cL.8 AND 10 nouns, four, used when counting; dinku tse nnê, four sheep; dinku di le nnê, sheep that are four, i.e. in number.
nnêêla - "aya, same as nnaya, give me.
nnêla - êla, wait for; sit for; abide.
nnêsê - nurse [borrowed].
nnete - similar to boammaaruri, truth; verily; frequently used with prefix ka to form.
nnetla - such and such a thing; its name being forgotten; thingummybob; thingummyjig. nngwe abj.s, used with nouns of one; podi nngwe, one goat.
nngwe - s, used with nouns of cL.9,a certain; nku nngwe, a certain sheep.
nngwelekgolong - 9-, hundredth.
nnile - has sat; has existed etc.
nnisa - cause to sit; cause to inhabit occupy or dwell.
nnisitse - has caused to sit, etc.
nnisiwa - being caused to sit, etc. nniwa V.Ss.PASS.,same as mnwa, being sat, dwelt at, or inhabited.
nnê - a drink; intoxication through drink.
nnoO - a state of being; dwelling place.
nnomore - number. nnôt6 A9- AND 9N-, and dinnêtê, a nought; a pher; a zero; music symbol; tonic sol-fa note [borrowed].
nnwa - being sat.
nnyaa - Same asm - m, expression of negative; no; nay.
nnyaa tlhê inrers - PHR, expression of wonder; little wonder; it is not surprising.
nnyadisa - give me away, said by the bride; go through and complete the arrangements that leave a spinster, or bachelor married, said about the person so involved, by the bride, or bridegroom to be.
nnyadisitse - has become responsible for my becoming married.
nnyaditse - has despised me; has looked down on me.
nnyafala - become lax; become less motivated, or inclined to.
nnyafatsa - make lax; cause to be less motivated.
nnyafatswa - being made lax.
nnyalêla - marries a son, or daughter of mine; becomes married to a relation of mine.
nnyaletse - has married a son or a daughter of mine. nnye apDj.s, small; little; few; young.
nnyefaditse - has caused to become small, etc.
nnyefaditswe - has been caused to become small, etc.
nnyefadiwa - (same as "nnyefatswa"), being caused to become small.
nnyefala - atrophy; become few, small little.
nnyefatsa - cause to become few, small, little.
nnyefatswa - (same as "nnyefadiwa").
nnyefetse - has become few small, little.
nnyêla - used as an insult. 1. EXPR, kgomo ga e ke e nnyêla bolôkê jotlhe.
nnyêlêlêla - êlela, disappear, or vanish from sight.
nnyetse - has defecated.
nny@ - vagina.
nny6-itlhê - 9N., corner of the eye.
nnywana - (same as "mpapa"), vulva. no vV.s.PFT., similar to ne, was or were, used only when the subject of the sentence is of. lobônê lo no lo tuka, the light was lit; the light was burning.
nO Ne - PHR, Same as ne ne, rarely used; at this time. nga _N.CL.9N., SING. oF dindga, a snake; a serpent.
nga potsane - a mythical snake said to bleat like a kid.
nêga ya phofu comp - a mottled snake, not very poisonous.
nogile - ôka_N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dindka, hip; pelvis; ilium., noka_N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dinoka, same as molapê, a river.
nokeditse - (same as "kgaotse has separated cattle into lots for drinking"),; has caused cattle to drink in small lots.
noketsa - (same as "kgaola"), separate cattle into herds for drinking; cause cattle to drink in small lots.
noko - a porcupine; portions of reed between two joints; a node; a syllable.
nokwane - a portion of reed between two joints; the second reed, ina reed band at a dance.
nolê - (same as "nwele"), which is less frequently used, has drunk; is drunk, ie. intoxicated.
nôl6 s - same construction as bonêlê, soft; tender; flexible; gentle.
ndlêfaditse - has made soft or tender; has made humble; has brought low, or humiliated.
nêlêfaditswe - has been made soft, or tender, etc.
nêlêfala - become soft, or tender; become gentle; become humble.
ndlêfatsa - make soft, or tender; make gentle; make humble.
ndlêfetse - has become soft or tender; has become gentle; has become humble.
nolwê - has been drunk; has been intoxicated.
nôêna - become fat.
nona - collective term for men hence many men, menfolk.
nona - make damp, or wet, as tobacco for grinding; to oil, or lubricate with liquid. nona lotswalê 1p. Expr, quench thirst by drinking a little; wet the whistle.
nonê - buck; antelope; blesbok. prov., o rapamêla nênê e se tsaabo. ID. EXPR, O tlaa swa a ya godimo go nênê, he will die through being cursed.
nonêla - lubricate for; spread fat or water on a thing.
nonetse - has lubricated for; has spread fat or water on a thing for; has become very stout as a result.
nonetswe - has been lubricated; water or fat has been spread over something for.
nong - the generic term for a very large bird; any bird that is very big, such as an eagle, etc. 1p. ExPR, o se bonê nong go rakalala godimo, go wa ke ga yonê.
nongêsêla - be heavy with sorrow; be in spiritual anguish. 1. Expr, pelo e amo nongosêla, his heart smote him.
nongosêl6 - agony.
nongosetse - has become heavy with sorrow; has become anguished of spirit.
nonnê - is fat; has become stout.
nonnê - has softened; has dampened; has oiled.
nonofa - become fat; become strong; gain weight, as a recuperating person.
nonofalêla - become able for.
nonofaletse - has become able for.
nonofêla - be equal to doing a thing.
nonofetse - has become able for, or to; has become equal to doing something.
nonofisa - (same as "nonotsha"), strengthen enable; give power to.
nonofisitse - (same as "nonotshitse"), has strengthened; has enabled; has given power to.
nonofisiwa - being strengthened; being enabled.
nonofiwa - be gaining strength or weight, as a growing person or thing.
nonof6 - ability; capability; power.
nonofologa - become able [ARCH,];; be or become weak; lose strength.
nonofologê - 9N-, a weakening; a loss of strength (rarely used).
nonofônyana - 9N-, a little power, ability, or strength.
nonotsha - similar to nonotsha and nonofisa, strengthen.
nonotshitse - (same as "nonofisitse"), has strengthened.
nonotshitswe - (same as "nonofisitswe"), has been enabled, or strengthened.
nonotsh6 - an empowering; a strengthening.
nonowêla - walk without specific destination in mind.
nonowetse - has sauntered; has walked without a specific destination in mind.
nontshitse - has fattened.
nontshitswe - has been fattened.
nontshiwa - similar to nonofisiwa, being fattened; being strengthened.
nonyane - genitals of a little boy (euphemism).
nênyane - bird; nong is used to refer to very large birds.
nopa - pick up something.
nopodisa - cause, or help to pick up things one by one, or between two fingers.
nopodisitse - has caused, or helped to pick up things one by one.
nopodisitswe - has been caused, or helped to pick up things one by one.
nopodisiwa - being caused or helped to pick up things, one by one, as a fowl.
nopola - pick up; pick up things one by one, as a fowl.
nopolêga - capable of being picked up one by one, as a fowl.
nopolêla - as a fowl, etc., for.
nopolêlwa - being picked up one by one, for.
nopoletse - has picked up things one by one, for.
nopoletswe - have been picked up one by one, for.
nosa - cause to drink; give water or beer to; irrigate.
nosana - give each other water or beer.
nosane - (same as "nosanye"), have given each other water.
nosanya - cause one another to drink, or serve each other with a drink.
noseditse - has watered, or irrigated.
nosediwa - being watered, or irrigated for.
nosetsa - 1osd, water or irrigate.
nosi - CL.1AND 1A., only; alone; una ke le nosi I alone; ke nosi, J am alone.
nositse - has given water to; has caused to drink.
nositswe - has been caused to drink.
nosiwa - being caused to drink.
nos6 ABST - 9N-,a drenching; giving of a drink.
nota - break, or snap bits of a stick; pound by hammering; pinch another; take a pinch of salt, etc.
notaka - take delight in pinching others.
nêtana - pinch each other.
nêtanota - or beat into a powder.
notanotile - has pounded, or beaten into a powder.
nêtêga - be poundable; be pinchable.
notêla - pinch for.
notetse - has pounded by hammering for; has pinched for.
notile - has pounded finely by hammering; has pinched.
notisa - cause, or help to pound small by hammering; cause, or help to pinch.
notisitse - has caused, or helped to pinch.
notisitswe - has been helped or caused to pinch.
notisiwa - (same as "notiswa being caused"), or helped to pinch.
notiwa - (same as "notwa and sonwa"), being pinched; being pounded small.
nôt6 - a hammer.
notwa - being pinched.
nowa - being drunk; drinking; being done or taking place.
nta - a louse. PRov., nta ya selomelo kobong. nta ya selomêla kobong 1p. Expr, hypocrite; a mischief maker; a cheat.
ntaa - (same as "ditaya"), or itaya, itaya is commonly used, strike; lash; beat; cane.
ntaaka - (same as "itaaka"), beat about extensively.
ntaana - (same as "itaana"), beat one another.
ntaanya - cause to beat, or lash each other; cause to hit or bang against each other.
ntaatsê - (same as "itaantsê"), has hit or banged one thing against another; has caused a thing to hit or bang against another.
ntanyêtsêga - be dashed, or thrown down to the ground.
ntanyetsegile - was dashed or thrown down to the ground.
ntaramane - as nferemane lung-sickness in cattle; pleuro pneumonia.
ntata - ME + V.S. < lata, follow, find me; come to where I am.
ntatê - ¢, same as rrê, my father.
ntatêla - (same as "ntshala morago"), come after me; follow me.
ntatetse - (same as "ntatêla"), same as ntatile, has come after me.
ntatisa - help me to follow the trail; help me to go in search of.
ntatisitse - has helped me to go in search of.
ntaya - (same as "itaya"), which is commonly used, strike; beat.
ntê - similar to ake and mma, polite command or request made to oneself or to someone else, as if to say, let me.
ntedi - a species of small bird. ntêêla DIAL. var oF itêêla, leave on one side; bypass; pass without touching.
ntekane - Same as ntekwane, but all the while; after all.
nteko - (same as "mtekane"), nevertheless; but all the while; after all.
ntekone - DIAL. VAR. OF ntekwane, nteka ntenka, nteko, ntekane, elekane, elenkane, whereas; after all; but actually; nevertheless; but all the while.
ntekwane - (same as "mfekane and nteko but all the while"),; after all; nevertheless. ntêl6_N. CL. 9N-, SING. oF dintêld, a wave; a billow; a piece of wood used for smoothing seams in a kaross.
nted - a stripe; a stroke.
nteremane - (same as "ntaramane"), lungsickness in cattle.
ntêwa - (same as "itêwa"), which is commonly used, being beaten; being struck. ntha _N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dintha, piece of flesh; tongue-tied; very tough piece of meat.
nthatanyana - (same as "thathanyana"), which is more commonly used, a morsel; a little piece; a little bit (of food).
nthê - ulcer; sore; a wound.
nthue - and N.A¢- same as nthuhe, a species of tree mouse; fine woolly hair.
nthufe - ¢-, same as nthue.
ntimo - (same as "koi"), a skipping rope. wp. EXPR, gO ja ntimo, Or go itaya ntimo, to skip with a rope.
ntla_ - just So; oh, yes.
ntla - DIALVAR. < tla, come.
ntlafaditse - has made clean; has made pretty.
ntlafala - become pretty or nice in appearance.
ntlafatsa - make clean; make pretty.
ntlafetse - has become clean; has become pretty.
ntlê - s., beautiful; nice; pretty; handsome. ntlê apv. oF pLa., used most often with such prefixal formatives as kwa-, fa-, etc., outside; used interjectively in telling a dog, be gone.
ntlha - a point; an item; a side; the first. inreru. ExPR, Surprise; wonder.
ntlhana - vim. oF ntlha a little point; a morpheme.
ntlhwa - a black, or brown wasp-like insect; edible flying ant, similar to cocktail insects, seen usually during the rainy season.
ntlo - and matlo, a hut; a house; come here. ntlo-lefaufau_N. hall.
ntlokgolo - 92., parliament; palace.
ntlokgolo - headquarters.
ntlokwe - ostrich.
ntlolê - (same as "matlolane"), and ntlolane, a spring hare.
ntlong DER - (same as "flang"), come here.
ntlopane - ¢-, same as nkopane, ntopane or selantopane, a species of small but venomous black ant.
ntlophemêl6 - 99-, fort, castle.
ntlwana - (same as "ntlwane"), a small hut, or house; a small hut of lesser status used as a bedroom, pantry, or kitchen.
ntlwane - (same as "ntlwana"), a small house, or hut.
ntlwana ya boithomêlê comp - a toilet; a lavatory.
ntona - probably the source of fona, cabinet minister; a servant of high rank; a trusted servant of the chief.
ntopane - ¢-, same as ntlopane or tsilantopane, or selantopane, a small but very venomous black ant.
ntopane - euphemistic reference to a child's penis and foreskin.
ntša - (same as "ntšwa"), a dog.
ntsaana DER F - DIAL. VAR. OF nfseana, same as antsaana, usually expresses surprise, or wonder; after all; actually; so.
ntsala ABJ. CONC - MEPLUSV.S. < tsala, give birth lit., give birth to me; become my foster parent.
ntsala - a cousin.
ntsalaê - ¢-, his or her cousin.
ntsalaka - ¢-, my cousin (addressing him/her).
ntsalakê - my cousin (speaking about him or her).
ntsalao - ¢-, your cousin.
ntsaya - N-,MEPLUSV.S. < tsaya, take; take me; marry me.
ntse - similar to nnile, have inhabited; have sat; have existed. v.s. aux., giving meaning of continuing action, ke ntse ke roka, I have been sewing; ke ntse ke a roka, | am continuing to sew.
ntseana DER - (same as "nfsaana"), Or antsaana, express surprise.
ntseane - ¢-, same as mantseane, mokgatitswe, or mokgantutswane, creatures of the lizard species, the smaller type of lizard.
ntšha - s., same as ntshwa new.
ntsha - similar to sema, take out; extract; bring out upon; give; offer; cause to change from being one thing into being something else; convert a thing into something else; o ntsha mosese phatê, he turns a dress into a mat.
ntshaba - conc.N-,me fear me.
ntshabêla - leave me in the lurch; forsake me.
ntshadi - dear little wife.
ntšhafaditse - has renewed; has repaired.
ntšhafaditswe - has been renewed; has been repaired.
ntšhafala - become new; be renewed; become clean; become pretty, or nice in appearance.
ntšhafalêla - become new, renewed, etc. for.
ntšhafaletse - has become new, renewed, etc., for; is new, renewed, etc., for.
ntšhafatsa - renew; repair etc.
ntšhafats6 - renewal.
ntšhafetse - is renewed repaired, etc.
ntshaka - take out excessively; extract give, excessively.
ntshana - remove from each other, as threads from each other's hair.
ntšhapa - N-,MEPLUS < Sapa, beat me.
ntshasa - N.,MEPLUSV.S. < tshasa, smear on me; paint me.
ntshasisa - help to smear (polish, paint, etc.) on.
ntshasitse - has smeared me with.
ntšhe - (same as "ntshwe an ostrich").
ntšhê - (same as "ntshwe sweet reed"),; sugar cane.
ntsheditse - has taken out for; has extracted for.
ntshêga - N-, MEPLUSV.S. < ftshêga, laugh; laugh at me; enjoy yourself at my expense.
ntshega - sega, OBJ. CONC. N-, MEPLUSV.S. < sega, cut; cut me; hurt me with a knife, or some sharp object.
ntshêka - N-, MEPLUSV.s. < sêka, defend me, as in a lawsuit; be my defence council; take steps to ensure that justice is done to me.
ntshêla - N-,MEPLUSV.S. < tshêla, pour (something) over me.
ntshêpa - N-, ME PLUS V.S. < tshêpa, trust; trust me.
ntshetla oBy. CONC - MEPLUSV.S. < Setla, beat or hit me.
ntshetsa - take out for; extract etc., for; bring out to.
ntshi_ - similar to losi, bank of a river; a shore; an eyelash; eyebrow.
ntshiê - N-,MEPLUSV.S. < siya, leave; please leave me behind; walk on.
ntshiêla - N-,ME PLUS V.S. < siêla, leave some for me; give me water or beer to drink.
ntshietse - has left some for me; has given me some water or beer to drink.
ntshiisa - make me to be left behind by people, train, etc.; cause me to forget to take something along.
ntshiisitse - has made me to be left behind by some mode of transport, or companions; has helped me to escape; has caused or made me to leave something behind.
ntshitse - has taken out extracted, etc. PRov., mmapatsi phêkwana o tsamaya a ntshitse.
ntshitswe - has been taken out.
ntshiwa - extracted, etc.
ntshiya - N-,MEPLUS < siya, leave me behind; be late for transport to.
ntsho - s., black; a male animal, including oxen and bulls that are black.
ntshofaditse - has blackened.
ntshofaditswe - has been blackened.
ntshofala - become black.
ntshofetse - has become black.
ntshothwane - ¢., and dintshothwane, same as marakanamatsi, a small stomach of an animal having numerous folds; pancreas.
ntsi - s, many; plenty.
ntsi - a fly. 1D. EXPR, ntsi e okwa ke boladu.
ntsi ya pudumo compt - a black mason bee.
ntsifaditswe - has made to become many; has multiplied.
ntsifaditswe - have been made to multiply.
ntsifadiwa - being caused to increase.
ntsifala - increase; become many; multiply.
ntsifal6 - an increase of plant, animal or human population.
ntsifatsa - cause to increase; multiply; make to be many.
ntsifetse - has increased; has multiplied.
ntsdgotIh6 - ¢-, used.
ntsono - (same as "phitlhd"), funeral.
ntshu - a gizzard.
ntsu_ - (same as "nfswi"), an eagle; a crane. ntsutsu_N.same as pdlê, penis.
ntswa DER - (same as "e tswa and le mororo seeing that"),; any yet; although.
ntswa - (same as "tswaa"), N-, ME PLUS V.S. < tswa, (you) come out, forsake me.
ntswana - < le-, (dintswana), same as lentswana, little mountain.
ntswi - ntsu is more frequently used, an eagle.
ntuke - 9N., a rock squirrel. ntwa_N.a fight; a war; an army. PROV. ntwa kgolo ke ya molomo.
nwa - drink; in the habit of drinking (beer).
nwedisa - (same as "nwetsa"), cause to drown; submerge in a liquid.
nwedisitse - has caused to drown; has submerged in a liquid.
nwedisiwa - (same as "nwediswa"), being caused to drown.
nweditse - (same as "nwedisitse has caused to drown").
nweditswe - has been caused to drown.
nwediwa - (same as "nwetswa being drowned"),; being submerged.
nwêga - drinkable; being drunk to excess; capable of being drunk.
nwêla - sink; drink for; drown.
nwêlwa - being sunk; being drunk for.
nwetsa - cause to drown, or to be submerged.
nwetse - has drunk for; has submerged; has drowned.
nwetswe - has been drunk for; has been sunk.
nxa - (same as "cd"), eXpress disapproval, annoyance, or apology.
nxanxabetsa - (same as "ngangabetsa make a clicking noise").
nya - (same as "mmyêla"), excrete; exude.
nyabêga - be short of time.
nyabegile - is short of time; was short of time.
nyadisa - officiate at a marriage ceremony; cause to marry; arrange the marriage of an offspring to a fiance or fiancee.
nyadisitse - has officiated at a marriage ceremony.
nyadisiwa - being married to; being given away in marriage.
nyaditse - has despised.
nyaditswe - has been despised.
nyadiwa - (same as "nyatswa and nyatsiwa"), being despised. nyaêla_v.s.AppL., make wet for; soak for; make a joke; jest.
nyaêlwa - being dampened for.
nyaetse - has made wet for; has joked.
nyafaditse - cause to become slow.
nyafala - become slow; delay; procrastinate.
nyafatsa - cause to become slow; make to procrastinate.
nyafetse - become slow; delayed, etc.
nyaga - 9N-, same as ngwaga a year.
nyaile - has wetted, or dampened a thing.
nyaisa - cause or help to moisten or dampen.
nyaiwa - being dampened.
nyakalala - blossom profusely.
nyakaletse - has blossomed profusely.
nyala - espouse.
nyalaka - marry and divorce at an unprecedented rate; marry too many wives.
nyalakêga - be full of mirth and frivolity; play and dance.
nyalakegile - was mad with folly; has played and danced.
nyalakêg6 - 9n-, frivolity; dissipation.
nyalana - marry; reconcile matters, points, etc.
nyalanya - bring about a reconciliation, agreement or mutual understanding; make a couple get married.
nyalanye - have married each other; have reconciled.
nyalêla - marry into a family; marry the daughter of.
nyaletsa - "yatsa, despise for; belittle for.
nyaletse - has married into a family.
nyamuka - satiate; make soft or supple by smearing; smear with much fat.
nyamukile - has satiated; has made soft or supple by smearing; has smeared with a large quantity of fat.
nyantsê - has come, or gone softly; has sucked.
nyantsha - excel in doing; make a public display of.
nyantshetsa - excel at, to the detriment of.
nyantshitse - has excelled in doing; has made a public display of.
nyanya - come, or go softly; baby language used when breast-feeding, same as anywa.
nyanyaêla - quietly, or without noise.
nyanyaêlê - -N-, quietness; softness of tread.
nyanyaetse - has moved softly, or quietly.
nyaO - a joke; a jest.
nyadga - same as gakologa, rebound, as a bullet; melt, as frozen fat when being heated.
nyarêla - peep [doubtful].
nyarêtse - has peeped at (DJ.
nyato - a white spot on an animal's forehead; a head ornament, as a shell.
nyatsa - despise; treat with disdain; belittle; speak against; criticise unfavourably; defy; set at nought.
nyatsêga - be despised; be looked upon with disdain; become of bad repute.
nyatsegile - was despised; was looked upon with disdain.
nyatsi - a paramour; a lover; a sweetheart; concubine.
nyawa_ - (same as "nyad"), a joke.
nyaya - (same as "nydba"), wet something; dampen, as a garment before ironing.
nyedi - twinkle; sparkle; flicker instantly.
nyedima - twinkle as a star; shine with flickering light; sparkle, as a lion's eye at night; flicker in the distance.
nyedimêla - twinkle for; flicker for, etc.
nyedimetse - has twinkled for, etc.
nyedimile - sparkled; flickered. '.
nyedimisa - sparkle.
nyedimisitse - has caused to twinkle; sparkle; flicker.:.
nyedimisiwa - has been caused to twinkle.:.
nyedisa - euphemism, meaning to give one a thorough beating.
nyedisitse - has beaten someone very humiliatingly.
nyedisitswe - lit., has been made to excrete; has been beaten very severely.
nyedisiwa - being beaten very severely.
nyeditse - has shone as a glow worm; has shone, or burnt dimly. nyêka v.Ss.SIMP. [borrowed], not widely used, mix up.
nyêkeditse - has put on fine clothing; has shown off in fine clothing.
nyêkêtsa - put on fine clothing; show oneself off in fine clothing.
nyêla - defecate (used for animals or children).
nyêlê - disappear, or vanish instantly.
nyeledisa - (same as "nyeletsa make or cause to disappear"), or vanish.
nyeledisitse - has made to disappear, or vanish. nyêlêkêga_v.s. Neur., be mad with folly; be full of mirth and frivolity; play and dance. nyêlêkêg6_N. cL. 9n., frivolity; dissipation.
nyêlêkwa - being possessed or obsessed by.
nyêlêla - vanish; sink, as water in sand.
nyêlêlê - ruin; destruction.
nyeletsa - êlêdisa, cause to disappear, or vanish.
nyeletse - has disappeared; has vanished.
nyeloga - become visible suddenly.
nyelogile - has become suddenly visible.
nyelola - make suddenly visible.
nyelotsê - has made suddenly visible.
nyêma - become discouraged; become disheartened.
nyemile - disheartened. nyemisa _v.s. caus. cause to be discouraged, or disheartened.
nyemisitse - has caused discouragement; has disheartened.
nyemisitswe - has been ) discouraged, or disheartened; has been made lax, or loose.
nyemuka - (same as "nyamuka"), satiate; make soft, or supple by smearing; smear with large quantities of fat.
nyemukile - has satiated; has made soft or supple by smearing; has smeared with large quantities of fat.
nyêna - bite off a bit of a hard thing.
nyena - AND2A < bo-, 2ND PERS. Same as lona, which is more frequently used; you (plural).
nyenkile - widely used, has mixed up.
nyentsê - has smiled.
nyenya - smile; showing the teeth.
nyenye - S, DIM. OF 7ye, small in comparison with.
nyenye - has bitten off a bit of a hard thing.
nyenyeka - inscribe.
nyenyekile - gush out, as water.
nyeogile - yeoga, has gushed out, as water.
nyêra - similar to nyêma, become tender or soft, as overcooked meat.
nyêra marap6 - be cast down and helpless; melt with fear; become helpless through despair, or terror; become weakkneed.
nyêrêga - be faint, or tired; melt, as the heart with fear.
nyeregile - has become faint, or tired; has melted.
nyerile - has become tender; has melted; has become soft, or tender.
nyerisa - soften by cooking; meat.
nyerisitse - has softened by cooking; has melted; has caused to go to pieces.
nyerisitswe - (same as "gakolositswe"), has been softened by cooking; has been melted.
nyerisiwa - being softened by cooking; being made tender.
nyerd - dissolve, or melt instantly.
nyerologa - melt; dissolve; become melted; become tired; melt.
nyerologile - has dissolved; is melted; has melted.
nyerolosa - cause to melt; make to dissolve.
nyerolosetsa - dissolve for.
nyerolositse - has caused to dissolve; has made to melt.
nyerolosiwa - being caused to melt; being made to melt.
nyêta - as a mouse; break off a little piece of food.
nyêtêga - or easily broken.
nyetegile - has become brittle or easily broken.
nyetile - has eaten with a clicking noise, as a mouse.
nyetsa - (same as "Senyetsa cada").
nyetsa - shine, as a glow worm; shine, or burn dimly.
nyetsana - (same as "senyetsana"), a childless woman; a woman who has lost her children; a she goat/cow that produces milk even though it doesn't have a kid/calf; a she goat that produces milk in and out of breeding season.
nyetsanyeditse - has twinkled, as stars.
nyetsanyetsa - twinkle, as stars.
nyêtsê - (same as "thaka e tshweu thwe white of an eye"),; sclera.
nyetse - has married; has espoused.
nyeudisa - cause to swarm; cause to be maggoty; cause to teem with.
nyeudisitse - has caused to swarm.
nyeudisiwa - being caused to swarm; being caused to teem with.
nyeula - swarm; being caused to swarm; being caused to teem with.
nyeuma - teem, aS worms; move about like many maggots.
nyeutsê - has swarmed; has teemed, like worms. nydba_N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dinydba, similar to nywaba; a riddle; a puzzling question; a sweet reed. pRov., go tswa ka nyêbana e sa fotlhwa. nyêba _v.s.simp.,rarely used and considered vulgar, have sexual intercourse.
nyôbêka - disarray; disorder.
nyobokeditse - has thrown into disarray.
nyoboketsa - disorder.
nyOitlh6 - 9-, corner of an eye.
nydkêlêga - (same as "nyêkdrêga"), or nyônkêlêga, be slow to obey; be loath to do a thing; act in a sluggish manner.
nyOkêlêgile - has been slow to obey; has acted in a dull and sluggish manner. nyonkôêlôga DIAL. VAR. oF mydkêlêga. nyônkôêrêga DIAL. VAR. oF nydkêlêga.
nyonnyobeditse - has tormented, or teased with the aim of producing in one a feeling of shame, by exclaiming nyonnyobi! while at the same time moving open hand(s) to and fro.
nyonnyobediwa - or teased by both a facial expression and exclaiming myonnyobi! while at the same time moving open hand(s) to and fro.
nyonnyobetsana - or tease one another.
nyonnyobi - calculated to demoralise; discourage as well as bring shame on one; as good as saying, shame on you, to a culprit.
nyênyêkêga - be merry.
nyonyekegile - was merry; is merry.
nyonyobetsa - (same as "nyunyuetsa"), a process in which shame and guilty feelings are induced in a culprit; tormenting or teasing another by facial expressions, verbal exclamation of nyonnyobi gestures with fingers as if ready to pounce; pout out the lips in scorn or derision. nyopaana V.Ss.NEUT.,Same as moopa, be barren; used of animals.
nyorêlwa - thirst for; long for.
nyoretswe - has thirsted for; has longed or yearned for.
nyorilwe - has been thirsty; has become thirsty.
nyoriwa - being thirsty; be thirsty; become thirsty.
nyunyuditse - has pouted out the lips in scorn, or derision.
nyunyuetsa - (same as "nydnnydbetsa"), pout out the lips in scorn, or derision.
nyuthone - newton; a unit of force in the metric system [borrowed].
nywaba - (same as "nyawa"), a puzzling question; a riddle.
