paakane - a peg.
paakanyetsê6 - 9N-, a preparation for something; an arrangement for; an arranging of.
paakanyê - 9N-, a preparing; a preparation; a correction.
paanana - currently used not as a diminutive; an open, treeless plain; a deserted place; a wilderness.
pabalêlê - arefulness; watchfulness; oversight; providence; endurance.
pabê - an itch, an irritation.
padi - a grain of corn, or mealie, cracked in roasting.
padi - fiction.
padile - has refused to come when called, has refused to reform.
padimola - smack, or hit hard; kill superstitiously.
padimosa - strike with an arrow, bullet etc., but not to penetrate; ricochet.
padimosêga - used of a log of firewood smouldering and with ashes falling off, but without flame.
padimosegile - has smouldered, said of a log of wood.
padimositse - has struck with an arrow, bullet, etc., but not penetrated; has made to ricochet.
padisa - be obstructive, or make obstreperous; make difficult.
padisetsa - obstruct for; make difficult for.
padisitse - has made obstructive.
padisitswe - has been made difficult; has been made impossible.
padisiwa - being made difficult to achieve, or accomplish.
padis6 - an obstruction; a school reader; a reading.
pagama - imb; mount; ride; mount, as a bull copulating, hence mate.
pagamana - imb over each other. pagamane vV.s.PFT. < pagamana, have ridden on one another.
pagame - has ridden, climbed or mounted.
pagamêla - (same as "palamêla"), a leafy parasite, such as Erianthemum; Loranthun, etc., mistletoe.
pagamêla - (same as "palamêla"), ride climb, or mount for; be ascending steeply.
pagamêlêla - be ascending steeply.
pagamêlêlwa - being climbed for.
pagameletse - has climbed to, or for.
pagameletswe - has been climbed towards.
pagametse - has climbed ridden, etc., at.
pagametswe - has been climbed, ridden, or mounted for, or at.
pagamê - transport.
pagangwa - (same as "pagamiwa"), being ridden; mounted, etc.
pagangwe - has been ridden; mounted, etc.
pagologa - (same as "fologa descend from a height"),; come down; dismount from a horse.
pagologêla - dismount for; descend for.
pagologile - has descended from a height, or a mount.
pagolola - similar to anogolola take down; unhang something.
pagololêla - take down for; bring down a thing for.
pagololêlwa - etc., being taken down for.
pagololwa - being taken down.
paka - a season.
paka - a suit or uniform.
paka - fetch water from a long distance; provide water, or food for a long journey; mopakê, pack, put together, or pile up.
paka - (same as "supa"), bear witness; praise.
pakaka - provide much water, or food for a long journey; be very busy putting together, or piling up.
pakêga - well put together, or packed; laudable.
pakêgêla - êga, be well arranged for.
pakegile - be well put together.
pakêla - provide water, food and other essentials for a trip, or a long journey; pack for; make firm, as a loose bundle; bolt, or fasten a door.
pakêlwa - being provided for with food, water, etc., for a trip.
pakerisa - carry.
pakerisitse - has carried.
paketse - has provided for with water, etc., for a trip; has bolted, or fastened a door.
pakile - has provided water etc., for a journey.
pakisa - cause or help to provide with water, etc., for a jouney.
pakisitse - has caused to pack; has caused to provide with water, etc., for a journey. pakisiwa vV.S.PASS. < pakisa, being caused to pack; being caused or helped to provide with water, etc., for a trip.
pakiwa - being provided; being praised.
pak6 - 9N-, veER.F. baka, cease doing something owing to fear of consequences; cessation from doing a thing for fear of the consequences.
pak6 - 9N-, praise; a praise; a glorification; flattery; adulation. prov., ba ba ratang pakê ba jewa dikobê. pakoga vV.S.NEUT. < pakola, same as thunya, become discoloured; fade.
pakogêla - become discoloured for.
pakogile - has become discoloured.
pakola - discolour.
pakolwa - being discoloured.
pakotsê - has discoloured.
pala - similar to lebadi, a scorch, a scar, a burn, due to basking by a fire.
pala - as an obstinate person; unmovable, as a heavy weight; refuse to come when called; refuse to reform.
palabalê - sins. oF dipalabald, a babbling; auction; selling an article to the highest bidder.
palama - (same as "pagama"), climb; mount ride.
palamana - ride on one another; climb over each other.
palamane - have ridden on one another.
palamanya - put things one above the other.
palame - has ridden, climbed ete.
palamêla - similar to boswa and same as boletswa, similar to mistletoe, leafy parasite including Erianthemum, Loranthus, etc. spp.
palamêlêla - ascend to the required height.
palamêlêlwa - being climbed for, or to.
palameletse - has climbed to or for.
palameletswe - has been climbed to, or at. palamêntê w. cL. 99-, sinc. oF dipalamêntê [borrowed], parliament.
palametse - has climbed to or at.
palametswe - has been climbed for, or at.
palamisa - cause to climb, or ride.
palamisitse - has caused to climb, or ride.
palamisiwa - being caused to climb, or ride.
palamonwana' - 9N-, same as reng, mohitshana and mhitshana, a ring worn round a finger as an ornament or token.
palangwa - was, or is being ridden.
palangwe - has been ridden.
pale - a pole [borrowed].
paledisa - make too much for; cause to fail.
paledisitse - has made too much for.
paledisiwa - being made too much for.
palêga - be impossible; be unmanageable; be unaccomplished; become unresponsive to reform.
palegile - has become unmovable, as a heavy weight.
palêla - foil, hinder, or frustrate one.
palêlwa - being hindered balked, or foiled, etc.
palema - (For), palm (of the hand); palmtree.
paletse - has proved too much for; has hindered.
paletswe - has been hindered foiled, etc.
pald - a number; a counting; a reckoning; a reading; quantity.
palogê - to be on heat or to be in season, used of animals.
palêmaleka - -, even number.
palone - polony [borrowed].
palêtlase - minimum.
pampa - bear false witness against.
pampile - has borne false witness against.
pampiri - 9N-, [FOR., paper.
pampiripots6 - 9N-, question paper.
pampirigaba_ - 9-, sandpaper.
pana - inspan; bind by tying forelegs, or hind legs together.
panana - banana [borrowed].
panang - a scab.
panka - (same as "fanka"), which is less commonly used, walk slowly with legs apart.
pankêla - walk slowly with legs apart for.
panketse - has walked slowly with legs apart for, or to.
pankile - has walked slowly with legs apart.
pankisa - cause to walk slowly with legs apart.
pankisitse - has caused to walk slowly with legs apart.
pantsê - has used all speed.
panya - take a very small amount.
panya - use all speed; hasten. 1p. Expr panya ka sebete, cause to lie on the stomach.
panyêga - lie flat.
panyêgile - has lain flat.
panyeletsa - pin down to the ground.
panyetsa - (same as "konyetsa give only a small amount to"),; to give very little.
paodile - has driven one, or two animals out of a herd.
paoga - as a pan or pool.
paogantsê - has leapt over, as over a gully.
paoganya - leap over, as over a gully; step from stone to stone, or rock to rock.
paola - drive one, or two animals out of a herd. Papa N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dipapa [borrowed], dye from new cloth when first washed; porridge.
papadi - business; merchandise; things purchased, or collected.
papaladitse - has made tight or rigid.
papaladitswe - has been made tight, or rigid.
papalala - be tight, rigid, or stretched out stiffly.
papalatsa - make tight, or rigid; stretch out tightly.
papaletse - has made tight, or rigid.
papalê - gain; interest of money; benefits acquired.
papamala - be tight, as a garment; fit tightly; be on a level; be horizontal; be unequivocal and adamant. Papamatsa v.s.caus. < papamala, cause to be on a level surface, hence make conspicuous.
papametse - has become tight, as a garment, etc.; be conspicuous.
papana - smooth out a wet skin.
papannê - has made smooth to or brought down to, a level.
papasane - wild mustard.
papatha - DIAL. VAR. OF phaphatha, which is more frequently used, pat with a hand, or stone when smearing, or making a mud floor.
papathêga - used when driving a person away in anger.
papatis6 - same as tlhatsôê and kolobetsê, which are more commonly used; baptism [borrowed].
papatlalana - wrestle, or struggle together for some time.
papatlalanye - have wrestled together for some time.
papatsany6 - [arcu], commerce; bartering wares and cattle.
papatsha - beat severely with a stick, or open hand.
papatshitse - has beaten severely with a stick, or open hand.
papatshwa - a stain.
papetla - used mainly as a RELs.a flat thing.
papetla - crumple; crush; flatten, as by squeezing between two great forces.
papetlana - a small flat thing; coin money.
papetlêga - become flattened.
papetlêgêla - êga, become flattened for.
papetlegile - has become flattened.
papetlêla - crush for; flatten for.
papetletsa - (same as "pepetletsa"), drive slowly and carefully; attend to.
papetlets6 - gentleness.
papetlisa - help to crush, or flatten.
papetlisitse - has helped to crush.
papetlisiwa - being helped to crush.
papetliwa - or crushed.
papiedisa - cause or help to press, or stamp down.
papiedisitse - has caused or helped to press down.
papiedisiwa - being caused or helped to press down.
papieditse - has pressed down as loose earth.
papiediwa - being pressed down, as loose earth.
papiela - press down, as meal ina measure.
papirase - papyrus [borrowed].
papisa - simile.
papisê - 9N-, a comparison; a placing side by side.
papoldê - a stretching out; a crucifixion.
paposane - a small side stream in a river.
paputla - go along as a blind man; grope one's way along.
paputlile - has gone along as a blind man.
parafene - paraffin [borrowed].
paraga - galloping, as a horse; imagined sounds made by a horse racing.
paragantsê - has galloped; has raced, as a horse.
paraganya - gallop; race, as a horse.
paraladitse - has become stiff or erect.
paraladitswe - has been made stiff, or erect.
paralala - become stiff, or erect.
paralatsa - cause to become stiff, or erect; stretch out stiffly, as the arms, or legs.
paralats6 - 9N., a span, or stretch.
paralelokerama - 9N-, parallelogram [borrowed].
paraletse - are stretched out stiffly as the arms, or legs.
paratlêla - run away, as a wild ox.
pasa - a pass; a travel document; a passport [borrowed].
pasa - pass an examination.
pasêga - be passable, as an examination.
paseka - (same as "tsogd"), Jewish Passover; Easter [borrowed].
pasekale - 9N-, pascal; unit of pressure; computer language [borrowed].
pasêla - 9N-, similar to morokotso, bonsella (Southern African colloq.), a gift one gets after buying something; bonus.
phašog6 - No PL.,a loud noise, or shouting due to excitement, or extreme jubilation.
pata - a main road; a toad that is wider than a footpath; a road that is wide enough for use by four-wheeled vehicles [borrowed].
pata - a pocket ina shirt, or some other dress, or garment; a bull's penis [borrowed].
pata - accompany on a trip, or journey to some destination.
patadikgagane - a species of fern; a species of lizard.
patagana - be joined to; be one with; be yoked with.
patagantswê - have been united; have been yoked together.
pataganya - join two, or more things together; couple together; yoke together; place side by side.
pataganya - bend double; mend; bring together.
pataganye - have become joined with; have become yoked together.
patagany6 - polygamy.
patana - accompany each other.
pataol6 - ground on which soil has been stamped into a hard surface.
patêgd - ay for smearing; fomentation; the act of smearing.
pateleditse - has forced; has accused falsely.
pateleditswe - has been accused falsely; has been compelled.
patelediwa - being accused; being falsely accused.
patêlêla - constrain.
patêlêl6 - 9N., compulsion; constraint.
pateletsa - compel against one's wish; accuse falsely; slander.
pateletso - slander; a false accusation.
paterone - a pattern; a patrol; a cartridge [borrowed].
patika - a thin ring of beads worn below the knees and on the neck [D1].
patika - similar to pateletsa, oppress; do wrong to; distress; compel to do.
patikêga - become distressed; be afflicted; be shrunken up and miserablelooking through poverty of flesh.
patikegile - be distressed; be afflicted; be in a state of distress.
patikêgê - 9N., oppression; affliction; inconvenience.
patikêla - inconvenience. patikêlêla per F. patikêla, press upon, or against, with hands, or arguments.
patikêlêlwa - being pressed upon, or against, with hands, or arguments.
patikeletse - has pressed upon, or against, with hands, or arguments.
patikeletswe - has become pressed upon, or against, with hands, or arguments.
patiketse - has driven, or pressed into a corner, or narrow space for; has inconvenienced for.
patiketswe - has been driven into a corner, or narrow space for.
patikile - has oppressed; has done wrong to, etc.
patikilwe - has been oppressed.
patikiwa - (same as "patikwa"), being driven oppressed or afflicted.
patik6 - 9N-, an oppression or affliction.
patikwa - (same as "patikiwa"), being driven oppressed or afflicted.
patile - has accompained.
patilwe - has been accompanied; has been constipated.
patisa - cause to accompany; grip tightly between two surfaces; pinch.
patisitse - has caused to accompany; has sandwiched; has squeezed; has gripped tightly between two surfaces.
patisiwa - being gripped tightly between two surfaces.
patlama - (same as "patsama"), lie flat.
patlêl6 - an open space; a flat, level place; a playground.
patl6 - a seeking; a search; a formal request by parent(s) that their son be allowed to marry the other party's daughter.
patê - sole of the foot.
patolê - an anvil.
patologa - be restless; be delirious.
patologana - be parted, or separated; be cloven.
patologantsê - has split, or separated.
patologanya - pull apart things joined together or spliced.
patologanye - or separated.
patšama - which is commonly used, lie flat.
patšame - has lain flat; lies flat.
patsitse - has become very tired and stiff.
patwa - being accompanied, as on a trip.
pe - expresses disapproval; disparagement; contempt.
pea - deride, or mock.
pêba - %.-, biceps muscle; a mouse; arat. pRov., pêba go fulwa e e arametseng.
pebenyê - a flash, as of a fire; a shining, as of a sword flashing in the sun; a flickering, as of distant fires, etc.
pedi Num - s., two.
pêêlanôê - a wager; a stake; a bet. 1D. ExPR, go baya pêêlanêd, to give security; go bêwa pêêlanê, to be taken hostage.
peeledi - 9N-, the edge round the bottom of a kaross; the border or hem of a garment; a skin worn under the reed skirt of a girl going through the bojale ceremony.
pêêlêla - an edge; a hem.
pêêlêl6 - a | betrothal; a pledge to marry a young woman | at a later date.
pêêl6 - 9n-, a pledge, used chiefly of bewitching medicines.
pêga - hang; set, or place above. |.
pêgana - hang things on one another; lift | one another onto a surface. |.
pêgêga - be hung; capable of being hung. ID. EXPR, pêga molato, accuse, or lay blame upon.
pegile - has hung up.
pegisa - cause or help to hang up.
pegisitse - being caused or helped to hang up.
pegisiwa - being caused or helped to hang up.
pegiwa - (same as "pêgwa"), being hung up.
pegd - notice; record.
pegoga - awake; wake up.
pegogile - has woken up.
pêgwa - being hung up.
peinapolê - |For) pineapple.
peipi - a smoking pipe; a pipe [borrowed].
peise - a pimple; a horse sore [borrowed].
peisets6 - a racecourse; a running track.
peisê - a race; a contest of speed between runners.
peita - give an enema.
peitana - give one another an enema.
peitile - has given an enema.
peitisa - cause or help to give an enema.
peitisitse - has caused to give an enema.
peitisiwa - being caused or helped to give an enema.
peitê - enema.
pejama - pyjamas [borrowed].
pêka - (same as "tsênwa"), adulterate; mix; have diarrhoea and pass blood; go mad.
pekantsê - has mixed up together.
pekantswê - has become mixed up together.
pekanya - (same as "tswakanya"), mix up together.
peke - a pick; a pickaxe [borrowed].
pêkê - 1p. Expr, of flashing, as a torch light.
pêkêntsê - has flashed, as does an electric light, or lightning.
pêkenya - êkê, flash, as does an electric light, or lighting; sparkle.
pêkêsêla - pêkê, flash, like a torch when switched on.
pekile - has adulterated; has mixed up.
pela - bits of meat eaten out of a pot while being cooked.
pela - used mainly as a apv.s with the prefix ka-, ka pela, quickly.
pela - a coney; a rock rabbit; daisy.
pelaêlê - 9N-, doubt; suspicion.
pelafalê - 9N., boasting. pele apv. or PLA, before; in the front; ahead; forward; in the vanguard.
pelêêg6 ass - 9N-, impudence; affectation; willingness.
pelegi - 9N-, confinement; maternity; childbearing.
pelegis6 - 99., midwifery; maternity.
pêlêla - [oss], a sting.
pelera - (same as "pilisi pill"), tablet.
pelesa - a beast of burden; a pack ox.
pelesê - 9N-, similar to mokgweleê and morwalê, which are more frequently used, a burden.
pêlêta - spell.
pelo - a heart; the centre; provs, pelo ga e na khutsana; pelo ga e ile mmotlana.
pelo ee boitôb6 - a wily heart.
pelo ee tamutamu - PHR, merry-hearted.
pelo e thata - used mainly as a REL.s.,to mean hard-hearted; hard-heartedness.
pelo namagadi comp - tenderheartedness.
pelokgale comp - F. pelo, heart, and gale boldness, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean bold; courageousness.
pelokima compPL - 9N-, No PL, strong-hearted; bold; courageous.
pelompe comp - F. pelo, heart, and mpe bad, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean proud; daring; evilly disposed.
pelompêga - (same as "polompêga"), be unreasonably furious; be jealous.
pelonamagadi - ¢., heart, and namagadi, feminine; womanly hearted, hence tender-heartedness.
pelonêlê comp - F. pelo, heart, and ndlê gentle, used mainly as a REL.s. to mean humble; meek.
pelonomi comp - F. pelo, heart, and nomi gentle, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean magnanimous; kind; soft-hearted.
pelontlê comp - F. pelo, heart, and n#lê, nice hence pure-hearted; good-hearted.
pelotelele comp - F. pelo, heart, and telele long, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean patient; long-suffering.
pelothefe DER - s., good-hearted.
pelothere DER - s, carefully.
pelotlhomogi comp - F. pelo, heart, and tlhomoga, pull out, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean kind; merciful; pitiful; compassionate.
pelotona comp - heart, and tona, big.
pelotshêtlha comp - F. pelo, heart, and tshêtlha, grey, used mainly as a REL.s, to mean envious; greedy.
pelotshula comp - F. pelo, heart, and tshula bad, used mainly as a REL.s., to mean evilhearted.
pelotshweu comp - F. pelo, heart, and tsheu white, generous; hearted; kindhearted; good-hearted; favourable towards.
pema - the forked stick for a pack-ox's nose, used as a bit.
pena - bend back; turn back, as the edge of the knife; be bent, as a plough handle; engender a wrong feeling like pride, or disdain.
penama - bend back, or slope backwards; overflow (of a river).
pename - has bent back, or sloped backwards; has overflowed.
pênê - a pen [borrowed].
pênêga - become bent back; be pliable.
peni - AND N. and dipeni, pence; pennies [borrowed].
peniselene - ¢, penicillin [borrowed].
pênnê - has engendered a wrong feeling like pride, or disdain.
pennwê - has been bent back; has been engendered, as a wrong feeling like pride, or disdain; has been caused to be proud.
penoga - become visible; straightened by being bent back; lean back; straightened a thing that is bent [DJ.
penogile - has become visible.
penola - bend back, as the covers of a book when bent right back; make visible so that all may see.
penologa - become spread out, or widely extended, as an overflowing river; have eyes wide open; overflow with liquid.
penologêla - spread out to or widely extended, as an overflowing river for; have eyes wide open for; overflow with liquid for.
penologetse - has spread out to, or widely extended, as an overflowing river for.
penologile - has spread out to or widely extended, as an overflowing river, etc.
penolog6 - No PL, an overflowing.
penotsê - has bent back, as the covers of a book.
pênta - paint.
peolane - (same as "peolwane"), a swallow; a swift. peolwane DIAL. vaR oF peolane, a swallow; a swift.
pepeduma - talk indistinctly; mumble; roar indistinctly, as a distant lion.
pepedumile - has mumbled.
pepena - similar to pipina, make conspicuous; set out conspicuously, as a trader arranges his goods; rivet, as a bolt.
pêpênênê - has made conspicuous; has set out in the public eye, as the wares of a trader.
pepeneneng - (same as "mpepenene"), an open space; the open.
pepentsha - cause to be conspicuous; cause to be seen.
pepentshitse - has made conspicuous; has caused to be seen.
pepenwa - being made manifest; being made conspicuous.
pepere - pepper [borrowed].
pepesine - pepsin [borrowed].
pepetla - flatten; shrivel.
pepetlaka - flatten many things.
pepetlana - flatten each other, as things that are packed too tightly in a container.
pepetleditse - has urged on or encouraged.
pepetleditswe - has been urged on, or encouraged.
pepetlediwa - being urged on, or encouraged.
pepetlêga - become flattened; be shrivelled up.
pepetlêgêla - êga, become flattened for.
pepetlegile - has become flattened.
pepetletsa - urge or egg on to do something; familiarise gently; do slowly, carefully, or leisurely; attend carefully to.
pepetletsana - egg each other on.
pepetletso - an egging on, or urging along; doing with slowness, carefulness, gentleness or leisureliness.
pepetlisa - has caused or helped to flatten.
pepetlisitse - has helped or caused to flatten.
pepetlisiwa - being helped to flatten.
pepetliwa - being flattened.
pepi - (same as "mpepi"), carry a child on the back. PepO N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dipepo, large sour plum; monkey plum; Ocaceae.
pere - pear [borrowed].
perekisi - 9N-, a peach [borrowed].
pêrêk6 - Same as mmêrêko, work [borrowed].
pêrêla - a pearl [borrowed].
perepeditse - has driven away; has sent off.
perepetsa - send off.
pesets6 - a roasting; the act of sacrificing, or roasting sacrifices; an altar.
pes6 - a roasting; the act of sacrificing, or roasting sacrifices; an altar.
petapetand - recrimination.
petapetê - a murmuring; struggling against.
petekama - be confused, or mixed up, as sounds.
petekantsê - has confused, or mixed up, as sounds.
petekantswê - has been confused, or mixed up, as sounds.
petekanya - as sounds of voices.
petekeditse - has talked so fast as not to be understood.
petekeditswe - has been said so fast as not to be understood.
peteketsa - talk so fast as not to be understood.
peterôl6 - {Fror), petrol.
petla - pout; push out the lips as a token of contempt.
pêtla molomo v - PHR, pout; push out the lips as a token of contempt.
petlaka - overdoing pouting or pushing out the lips. petlama vV.S.SIMP., DIAL. VAR. oF betlama, which is more frequently used, has shone forth.
petlame - DIAL. var.oF betlame which is more frequently used, has shone forth.
pêtlêka - open wide, as a book, or hands; lay bare and exposed; sit indecently.
pêtlêkê - 90-, a species of eagle.
petlelôt6 - (same as "pênsêlê"), pencil [borrowed].
petlê - an adze; an instrument for scraping the flesh off the inside of skins.
petlomajwe - sculpture.
petlosa - open an eyelid with the fingers. | petlositse v.s. prr, has opened an eyelid with the fingers.
petlwana - 9N-, OF petld, an adze; hoe.
pet6 - a punishment; a beating.
petsane - species of long grass with flowers growing on the sides of the stems, used for thatching.
petsO - a punishment; a beating.
pew - used to call a dog.
phabaditse - has lanced, or pierced open, as an abscess.
phabatsa - lance, or pierce open, as an abscess [archaic].
phadile - has excelled.
phadimê - cut one's hair on the sides of the head.
phadimêpê - a patch on the head where hair has been cut.
phadimile - has cut one's hair on the sides of the head.
phadimoga - jump to one side; shy, as a horse; start; make a sudden movement; say something unconsciously.
phadimogile - has jumped to one side; has made a sudden movement.
phadimola - cause to start; cause to run off quickly, as rain being directed by wind changing direction.
phadimolwa - being caused to jump to one side; being caused to start.
phadimosa - cause to jump to one side; cause to start; make shy, as a horse.
phadimositse - has caused to jump to one side, ete.
phadimosiwa - (same as "phadimoswa"), being caused to start, or to make a sudden movement.
phadisan6 - -, same as dikgaisanê, competition.
phae - pie [borrowed].
phaene - pine [borrowed].
phaephe - pipe [borrowed].
phaeyana - traditional woman's skirt.
phafa - a vessel for holding beer; a calabash. 1. Expr, lentswe je le phafa, a ear strong voice.
phafamog6 - %.-, diphafamogê delirium; madness.
phafana - the shell of a gourd emptied, dried and used as a drinking vessel; a small vessel for beer, monna phafana o a fapaanêlwa.
phagê - a wild cat.
phagêla - rush upon; commence an attack.
phagêlêla - or upon in an attack.
phageletse - has rushed at, or upon.
phagetse - has commenced an attack.
phahadimo - a species of grass.
phahuditse - (same as "phabaditse"), has pierced, or lanced.
phahutsa - pierce, or lance.
phaidisa - cause to give a side blow with the open hand.
phaidisitse - has caused to give a side blow with the open hand.
phaidisiwa - being caused to give a side blow with the open hand.
phaila - give a side blow with the open hand; remove with a sweep of the open hand; drive oxen to one side away from others; fall, as the first rain of the season. i | | phailaka v.s.exr, give many side blows with the: open ae, | phailakile v.s. PFT. < phailaka, has given many side blows with the open hand.
phailakilwe - has been given many de. blows with the open hand.
phailakiwa - (same as "phailakwa"), being removed with a sweep of the open hand many times, or often; being driven hither and thither.
phailakwa - (same as "phailakiwa").
phailêga - capable of being given a side blow with the open hand.
phailegile - has become removed with the sweep of the open hand.
phailêla - drive oxen to one side away from others for; fall, as the first rain of the season for. i s.Prr. < phailêla, has removed witha sage i fas ai hae breached aside quickly and easily rie '0G.
phaka - aka (ror), park.
phaka - obtain rations; take rations; take more than a fair sce satin; gporee aS one Teer alae eine. R phakalêga ishoseaigeti haka, be placed across, or lie across, as a piece of wood on the top of:; two other pieces standing apart. ae.
phakalêgêla - êga, be placed across, ' or lie across, as a piece e of wood for.
phakalegile - as a piece of wood on top of two other pieces standing apart.; phakalêgê6_n. cL. 9v., anything placed horizontally on the top of two upright poles set apart; a crossbeam.
phakane - a rifle range.
phakarisa - carry on the back, as a quiver.
phakarisitse - has placed one thing across another at right angles to make a cross.
phakarisiwa - being placed across another thing at right angles to make a cross. phake botlhoko tw. expr, quarantine.
phakedisa - cause or help to get up very early.
phakedisiwa - being made to rise up, very early.
phakêga - as a piece of wood placed horizontally on two ' other eed:.
phakêla - obtain rations for; take more than a fair share.
phakêla - get up in the early morning.
phakêlêla - get up early for.
phakêlêlana - rise very early to meet one.
phaketse - has risen early.
phakê - a wall plate; a pole on which rafters rest; a lintel.
phala - an impala; a roebuck; a whistle; a kind of flute, or horn, rrovs, botlhale jwa phala bo tswa phalaneng, and phala e se nang phalana lesilo. | Phala v.ssiwp,excel.
phaladi - 9N., a dispersal; a scattering of the people, as a famine, or pestilence. result ofa pO E *.
phalalê - 9N-, a word used to signify church contributions to mission work.
phaloga - be broken at the stem, or joint, as a hanging branch; leave others and go off by oneself.
phalogile - is broken at the stem, or joint, as a hanging branch; has left others and gone off by oneself.
phalola - break off a branch, or twig at its junction with the rest of the tree.
phalolê - falola an escape. phalotsê 4 pr. < phalola, has broken off a branch, or twig at its junction with the rest of the tree.
phamisa - turn artfully aside another's word. |.
phamisitse - has turned artfully aside another's word. = phamodisa v.s.causeE. < phamola, cause or help to snatch. _— phamodisitse v.s. rrr. < phamodisa, has caused or helped to pluck out, or away; has helped or caused to snatch.
phamodisiwa - being caused or helped to snatch.
phamofolêtê - 99-, pamphlet [borrowed].
phamogêla - start doing something hastily for.
phamogile - started doing something, hastily.
phamola - snatch; take away quickly; pluck out.
phamolêga - Snatchable; pluckable.
phamolegile - has been snatched; has been plucked successfully.
phamolwa - being snatched, or plucked away.
phamotswê - has been snatched.
phamphanyêga - become cracked, as a wall or a board, etc.
phamphanyêgêla - êga ache for; become cracked for.
phamphanyegetse - < phamphanyêgêla has ached for.
phamphanyegile - has ached; has become cracked.
phane - mophane worm; an edible grub that feeds on mophane leaves.
phanêga - (same as "ranyêga"), be cracked; become burst; become cracked.
phanêlê - %-, diphanêlê, panel [borrowed].
phang - a pointed stick used for digging holes, etc.
phanngwa - being smacked, or slapped. | phantla v.s.simp.,spread abroad, as a swarm of locusts; holes, etc.; scatter, or become scattered over a wide area [archaic].
phantlile - has spread abroad.
phantlisa - or scatter.
phantlisitse - has caused to i spread.
phantlisiwa - being caused to spread.
phantsê - has smacked, or slapped; has cracked. phantsetsa v.-s. APPL. oF phantsha, cause to burst for.
phantsha - cause to burst; speak out freely and without fear.
phantshitse - has caused to burst, or crack. phanya y.s. simp. burst; crack; strike with an open hand.
phanyêga - die suddenly; crack. Phanyêgêla v.s. apex, crack for; burst for.
phanyegile - has cracked; has burst; has died suddenly. Phaologa v.s.NEUT, speak differently from, or take up a different position from others in a conversation, or dispute; appear as a wanderer.
phaologile - has spoken differently from others in a conversation.
phapaanê - an alternation; a course, or turn; an interchange; a passing in different directions.
phapang - quarrel between husband and wife or some other group.
phaphadikola - 149-,a woodpecker.
phaphaladitse - has made.
phaphalala - become dry, as the ground or a cloth; be drying up, as a thirsty mouth or an empty milk sack.
phaphalotsa - cause to dry, as by putting something wet in the sun; make dry, as a wound or a sore.
phaphama - flutter, as hanging clothes or chaff blown by the wind; quiver, as an arrow; be hasty.
phaphamaka - be very hasty; flutter a lot.
phaphamêla - flutter for; quiver for.
phaphamisa - cause to flutter.
phaphamisitse - has caused to flutter.
phaphamisiwa - being caused to flutter.
phaphamiwa - being fluttered.
phaphamola - wreck, as a bomb; smash to smithereens.
phaphantshwane - (same as "thuthuntshwane"), roasted maize; popcorn.
phaphanya - ache.
phaphasêla - flutter, as a fowl being caught; quiver, or vibrate, as the wings of a hawk about to pounce, or the limbs of a dancer.
phaphasetse - has fluttered as a fowl being caught, etc.
phaphatha - a bun.
phaphatha - make flat, as a ball of dough, or mud when plastering.
phaphathêga - become flattened; run, as a child afraid of being beaten.
phaphathêgêla - êga, become flattened for; run away, as a child who is afraid of being beaten.
phaphathegile - has become flattened.
phaphathegisa - cause to scamper, as a guilty child.
phaphathegisitse - has caused to flee.
phaphathegisitswe - < phaphathegisitse has been caused to flee.
phaphathegisiwa - < phaphathegisa being made to flee.
phaphathegiwa - being run away from danger; being fled.
phaphathi - s, level, flat; broad; wide.
phaphathile - has made flat, as dough.
phaphatshana - disc.
phaphauleditse - has gone aimlessly on.
phaphauletsa - go aimlessly on; be as a fool not knowing what one is doing; do some rash thing unthinkingly; venture in ignorance.
phaphaulets6 - 9n-, aimlessness.
phaphi - a piece of wood, etc., cut off lengthwise.:.
phapê - a bandage, or binding.
phapogo - a turning aside; menstruation; a going astray.
phaposi - (same as "kamore"), room.
phaposibonn6 - sitting room.
phaposikhirê - 9N-, lodging house.
phapositlase - 99-, siING. oF diphapositlase basement.
phara - etc.
phara - throw clay, dung or mud at; throw clay or mud, as when plastering.
pharagang - a small eft in a rock, or between stones.
pharaganyane - a small opening between stones, or rocks.
pharagatlana - 's way in; break in upon.
pharagatlanye - has forced one's way in; has broken in upon.
pharama - sink, or fall down, as an animal from weakness, or a person from fright; lose one's presence of mind from fright.
pharamaka - sink, or fall down many times, as a weak, or sickly animal.
pharame - has sunk, or fallen down, as an animal from weakness.
pharamêla - sink, or fall down at, as an animal from weakness.
pharametse - has sunk, or fallen down, as an animal from weakness.
pharamisa - cause to fall helplessly, as an animal from weakness.
pharamisitse - has caused to fall, as an animal from weakness.
pharamisitswe - has been caused to fall as an animal from weakness. has been made to sit on a surface with legs outstretched.
pharamisiwa - being made to lose one's presence of mind.
pharamoseseng - 1A¢-, perch, and mosese, dress; a woman's man; any man that is fond of the company of women.
pharasaete - 9N-, parasite [borrowed].
pharatšhutu - parachute. ' [borrowed].
pharê - a trumpet made from an arm or leg bone.
pharê pri - instant plastering, or daubing with mud.
pharêga - capable of mud being thrown at a person; successfully throw mud at a thing.
pharêgêla - êga, daub with mud for.
pharegile - has daubed with mud.
phareiti - parade [borrowed].
pharêla - daubing and smearing with mud for.
pharetse - has daubed and smeared with mud.
pharing - ¢., DIAL. VAR. OF mampharing rarely used, same as kgantlape, a lizard, blue under the chin.
pharitlha - creep, or crawl fast on hands and knees; go on hands and feet without the body touching the ground.
pharitlhile - has crept, or crawled fast on hands and knees.
pharologan6 - 9N-, a distinction.
pharologany6 - NO F. farologana, a distinction; a difference.
phašameditse - has caused to rage, as a torrent.
phašametsa - cause to rage, as a torrent.
phašametsêga - be driven along like a rushing stream; be rowdy.
phašametsegile - was driven along like a rushing stream.
phašog6 - No PL, a loud noise, or shouting due to excitement, or extreme jubilation.
phasele - parcel [borrowed].
phata - an opening for a path between two hills; the open space between two posts.
phatana - a small opening between two hills, etc., more frequently used than phata.
phatê - 9N-, a skin for sleeping on; a skin mat, for the floor; a mattress.
phathaphatha - ExPR, the sound made by raindrops when falling.
phatla - 9N-, a forehead; a mountain peak. 1p. exper, namane ya phatla, a calf suckling from two cows.
phatlakantsê - has dashed or broken in pieces; has burst out into speech fearless of anyone.
phatlakantswê - has been dashed or broken into pieces.
phatlalala - disperse, as a crowd; become scattered; stray and scatter, as cattle or sheep.
phatlalalêla - desert; withdraw one's help, friendship or companionship.
phatlalatsa - cause to disperse; distribute the property of the deceased among the heirs.
phatlalats6 - 9n-, a dispersal in an active sense.
phatlaletse - are scattered or dispersed; have scattered.
phatlaletswe - have become scattered, or dispersed; a scattering or dispersing has been accomplished.
phatlha - similar to leroba or letshoba and phêtlha, an opening or gap, among trees, or in a hedge; a hole ina wall; vacancy; outlet.
phatlhadika - as open country.
phatlhadikile - was, or is lying flat and spread out, as open country.
phatlhatirê - vacancy.
phatlo - splinter.
phatloga - be torn, or split; open up, as by rending or splitting; die suddenly. Phatloga_v.s. REv. be cracked.
phatlogêla - become rent for. Phatlogile v.s. prr, is split; being in a rent, split or cracked state.
phatlola - caused to be split or rent; pull apart, as a split stick; cut lengthwise; cleave; cut open; split open.
phatlotsê - has split, or rent apart.
phatoganê - a breach; a split.
phatogantsê - has cleaved asunder; has split.
phatoganya - split; cleave asunder.
phatogê - a crack.
phatsa - a chip; a splinter; a board; a piece of wood cut off lengthwise; a small piece inserted in the tip of an arrow; a measure of oth.
phatsêga - become split.
phatšha - (same as "/ephatsha"), similar to letlosa, a chiefs garden; a garden ploughed for a chief, the harvest of which he stores to use for the poor, or strangers, etc.
phatšha - of splashing with water etc.
phatšha - throw water at.
phatšhaka - throw water at, or out repeatedly and hence disturbingly bespatter.
phatšhakantsê - has dabbled with water.
phatšhakanya - (same as "phatshanya dabble in water with the hands"),; splash water about with the feet, as a child.
phatšhana - a baby's sleeping mat.
phatšhana - throw water at each other.
phatšhanya - dabble with water; splash water about with hands or feet, as a child.
phatšhediwa - being splashed with a liquid.
phatšhega - capable of being thrown out, as water.
phatšhegêla - be thrown at, as water or some other liquid when it spills.
phatšhegile - has been thrown out, as water.
phatšhetsa - throw water or some other liquid at; splash with.
phatšhisitse - has caused or helped to throw water at.
phatšhisiwa - being caused or helped to throw water at.
phatšhiwa - as water. phatshwa apbj.s., black and white markings on an ox. phatshwana ap1.s, black and white markings on a cow.
phatsi - flash, as a light, or lightning.
phatsima - shine, as the sun, or water; glitter.
phatsimetse - has shone upon.
phatsimisa - polish a thing until it shines. ~.
phatsimisitse - has caused to shine.
phatsimisitswe - has been caused to shine.
phatsimisiwa - being caused to shine; being polished.
phatsimiwa - being accomplished.
phatsodile - has been wilfully foolish.
phatsola - be wilfully foolish. Phatwê N.CL.1A¢., sING. oF boPhatwê, the month of August.
phedile - (same as "tshedile"), which is more frequently used, similar to falotsê, has survived, which is more frequently used; has lived.
phedisa - keep alive; cause to survive; sustain a dependent with the necessities of life.
phedisitse - has caused to live; has brought up.
phedisiwa - being caused to live; being sustained by a parent or guardian.
pheetshwane - v.,a species of long thatching grass.
phef6 - wind. 1. exer, go tsênwa ke phef6, to catch a chill; go iphokisa Phefo, to take a stroll; to go out of doors during or after convalescence.
phegêld - 9., diphegêlê, a sigh; a pant; semi-colon.
pheka - hold a goat's leg under one's knee when milking it.
phekagantsê - has laid across, as a bird lays sticks across its nest.
phekaganya - lay across, as a bird lays Sticks across its nest; hold a stick across the shoulders.
phekalala - lie across, as a baton on a door; lie across a path.
phekalêga - lean across or against, as a board placed to cover an opening, or a Setswana door.
phekalegile - has leaned across, as a board placed to cover an opening.
phekalêgê - 9n.,a lean-to.
phekaletse - to lie across; be lain across.
phekama - same as Phekalala lie Across: lean; slant; be oblique.
phekame - was lying across: was oblique; was slanting.
phekamisa - cause to lean; lie ACTOss, or obliquely.:.
phekamisitse - has Caused to lean; has slanted; has tilted to one side.
phekamisitswe - has been caused to lean; has been slanted; has been tilted to one side.
phekamisiwa - being caused to lean; being slanted; being tilted to one side.
pheke - 9n., a Stallion; an uncastrated male dog.
phekêga - be held in a slanting POsition: become placed in a slanting or tilting ' position, as some object.
phekegile - has placed something in a slanting position.
phekêla - hold, or place something in a slanting position for.
phekêl6 - on., the flank, or side of a cow; a change; a turn for the worst. phekêlê ya badimo 1p. pnr, the side of a cow Opposite to that at which the milker sits, phekêlê ya bogamê6 1p. pur, the milking flank.
phekiwa - being slanted; being made to slant.
pheko - a charm; an amulet.
phekola - charm, rub medicines on the wall of a house, or to rub the contents of an animal's stomach on a person for purification.
phekolwa - being treated with protective or purifying charms.
phekotsê - has treated with protective, or purifying charms.
phekotswê - has been treated with charms.
phekwa - (same as "phekiwa"), being slanted.
phela - which is more frequently used, survive; escaped death; live. phelamela6 wn. c1.9n.,a neglector, or despiser of warnings [D.].
phelea - babble; lisp; talk incoherently.
phelefu - 9N-, a sheep ram.
pheleka - similar to phelea, speak so as not to be understood; speak in parables.
phelekile - has spoken in parables.
pheleletso - 99, dipheleletso, end; outcome.
phêlôê - an end.
phelwane - DIAL. VAR oF peolane, which is more commonly used, a swallow; a swift; a martin.
phemêlê - 9N-, similar to phemê, a defence; a protection.
phemêd - 9N-, similar to phemêld, a defence; an avoidance.
phengwene - 9, |FOR] penguin.
penšêne - %-, same as pênsêlê, pension [borrowed].
pheo - 9N-, a conviction; a victory of words.
êpa - used mainly as a REL.s,a little light, as of moon, or stars, or at the dawn of day.
phêpha - the small round love-bean.
phephafaditse - has purified; has made pure; has cleansed.
phêphafala - become a little light; be clean, or bright, as stars, or moon; become clean. phêphafalê w. ci. 9n., DER F. phephafala, early morning; dawn; cleanliness; tidiness; the state of becoming clear.
phephafetse - has become clear.
phepheng - 9N-, same as lešokgo, a scorpion.
phepisa - 1D. EXPR, go ntsha phepisa, to go about indecently exposed (of a woman).
phepis6 - 9%, bait.
phêra - a single male wildebeest, or buffalo; a small bit of anything.
pherama - DIAL. VAR. OF pharama, which is more frequently used, sink, or fall down, in weakness.
pherame - has sunk, or fallen down, in weakness.
pherefere - pepper.
pheremetsa - use charms to cause to go far, or stray. pheremetsêga_v.s. simp. go astray; go in a certain direction unexpectedly.
pheretlhêg6 - 9n-, a state of disturbance.
pheretlhê - a disturbance; a stir; an insurrection; a tumult.
pherogê - Nausea [archaic].
phesana - used as a VAR. < phese, labia minora.
phesekana - be thrown down, with no regard for a thing's safety.
phesekanê - a falling down helplessly.
phesodi - 9N-, crane.
pheta - (same as "phetha"), turn.
pheta-ka-pejana compL - used mainly as a REL.
phetê - diphetê, abortion.
phetê - No infection; a contagion anything infectious, or contagious; anything possessing the power to bewitch.
phetêl6 - 9N-, an abortion; a miscarriage.
phethakga - (same as "phethekga"), similar to phethekgana, turn and toss, as a sick person, or a dying snake.
phethakgana - (same as "phethekgana similar to phethakga"), roll, or toss about as a sick person; be deceitful.
phethakganngwa - (same as "phethekganngwa"), being made to toss or roll about.
phethakganê6 - (same as "phethekgand"), a roil; a tossing and turning, as a sick, or restless person.
phethakgantsê - (same as "phethekgantsê"), has turned things; was topsyturvy; has caused to toss, or roll about.
phethakgantswê - (same as "phethekgantswê"), things have been turned topsy-turvy; has been caused to toss, or roll about.
phethakganya - (same as "phethekganya"), turn things topsy-turvy; cause to toss, or roll about.
phethakganye - (same as "phethekganye"), has rolled, or tossed about, as a sick person.
phethakgile - has tossed and turned, and tossed, as a sick person, etc.
phethêga - dislocate.
phethêg6 - a dislocation.
phetisanak6 - 9N-, hobby.
phêtla - turn, as the page of a book; open a book.
phetla - a swift; a martin.
phetlaka - turn many times, as the pages of a book.
phetlêga - turnable, as the pages of a book.
phetlêla - or to.
phetlha - love potion.
phêtlhêla - 9w., sine. or diphêtlhêla, fêtlha, an auger; an iron tool used for boring. phetlhu wn. n., diphetlhu, same as phetu, a stalk-borer; a stalk of a plant that has turned reddish owing to the effects of a stalk-borer.
phetlhwane - a trap.
phetlisa - < cause or help to turn pages or sheets or an object.
phetlisitse - has caused or helped to turn pages, leaves, etc.
phetlisitswe - has been caused or helped to turn pages.
phetlisiwa - being caused or helped to turn pages.
phetliwa - as pages ina book, or sheets when being counted.
phetloga - be dim, used of the eyes.
phetlogile - have dimmed, used of the eyes.
phet6 - a passing over; a passing by.
phetog6 - a change; a transfiguration.
phetol6 - 9N-, a changing; an interpretation; an answer made to a spoken word; a reply, to a letter.
phetšhunia - petunia.
phets6 - 9N., a completion; a finishing.
phetso - (same as "tshwetso"), conclusion.
phetso - of turning suddenly.
phetsoga - become reversed; become altered; be turned aside; change one's mind.
phetsoga - turn over. phetsogêla _v.s. appt. oF phetsoga, go against an individual; turn against a previous decision.
phetsogile - has become changed; has become reversed; has become altered; has changed one's mind. | phetsola v.s. caus. change; cause change to take. place; invert; reverse; turn upside down; roll a thing over on to its other side.
phetsolêla - reverse; turn inside out. phetu wn. ci. 9., sinc. or diphetu, same as phetlhu, a stalk-borer; a stalk of a plant that has turned reddish owing to the effects of a stalk-borer.
pheuga - (same as "theoga"), turn back at once; turn over immediately.
pheugile - similar to theogile has turned back; has turned over, as a pot on the fire.
pheula - turn something back at once; turn a thing round immediately.
phifadu - s, colour of an ox that is black; black (used of cattle).
phifalê - t. 9n., diphifalê, darkness; an eclipse.
phififal6 - 9n., (pj darkness.
phika - n., a large snake; a burrowing adder.
phikakgolo - 9n., a snake, probably mythical, believed to eat the human brain.
phikama - as a swarm of locusts; be very numerous, as a crowd of people; be overwhelmed; obstruct, as one sitting in front of another.
phikame - was dense, as a swarm of locusts; is overwhelmed.
phikantsê - has overwhelmed.
phikantswê - has been overwhelmed.
phikanya - overwhelm; crowd in upon.
phikile - has a sharp, piercing or shooting pain; has pneumonia.
phikile - has poured down.
phikilwe - has been unable to breathe owing to intense chest pains; being pneumonic.
phikwe - 9n., diphikwe, tree stems when heaped together.
phikwephikwe compt - stocks or reeds in the lands after harvest.
phil6 - 9n., a kidney.
phimodisa - cause or help to wipe.
phimodisitse - has caused or helped to wipe.
phimodisitswe - has been caused or helped to wipe.
phimodisiwa - being caused or helped to wipe.
phimodiswa - (same as "phimodisiwa").
phimoga - be wiped out; be blotted out; be rubbed off; be peeled off; have an abrasion.
phimogêla - become wiped out for.
phimogile - has become wiped, or blotted out; has become rubbed, or peeled off.
phimog6 - 9n., diphimogê, an abrasion.
phimola - wipe off, or out; blot out; cause an abrasion; rub off.
phimolêga - be wipeable.
phimolegile - has been wiped.
phimolêla - wipe on behalf of.;molwa v.s. pass. being wiped. P imotsê v.s. PFT. < phimola, has wiped; has wiped out, or off.
phintsê - has passed flatus per rectum; has voided wind; has broken wind. pintsha vV.s.CAUSE. < phinya, cause to pass p flatus; cause to void wind; cause to break wind.
phintshitse - has caused to pass flatus; has caused to break wind.
phintshiwa - being caused to pass flatus; being caused to break wind.
phintswê - flatus per rectum has been passed; wind has been broken.
pinyediwa - being passed flatus on to; wind has been broken on to.
pinyetsa - pass flatus on, or to; break wind on, or to.
phiri - 14¢, AND 9N-, and diphiri a hyena; spotted hyena; a wolf. prov. phiri o rile ga bo se gangwe.
phirima - set, as the sun. phirimane abv. oF T., sunset; at sunset.
phirimêla - as the sun.
phirimêlêla - incapacitate, as when the sun sets before a task has been done or completed or accomplished; to force one to stay overnight, owing to darkness setting in soon.
phirimêlêlwa - being unable to arrive at or to accomplish a task before sunset.
phirimeletse - has set for.
phirimeletswe - has the sun setting before getting home.
phirimise - which is more frequently used, nonsense; something that does not make sense.
phirimisitse - has done something until sunset.
phirimisiwa - something being done until sunset.
phirimiwa - as the sun.
phiritshwana - a brown hyena.
phisêg6 - a burn or scorch; an urge, or desire to do. Phisetso N.a burning place.
phis6 - a burning of material.
phitlhêl6_ - diphitlhêl6, a burial place.
phitlhê - a burial; a funeral.
phitsegile - has become crushed between two objects.
phitshêga - be bruised; be sprained; have a greenstick fracture. phitshêg6_N. cL. 9n-, siNG. oF diphitshêgo, fracture.
phitsisa - kill an insect by crushing it between the finger and thumb.
phitsisitse - has killed an insect by crushing it between the finger and thumb.
phitsisiwa - being killed, as an insect, by being crushed between the finger and thumb.
phodile - has jumped down; has jumped off; has dismounted.
phodisê - a healing; a cure.
phoditse - has rubbed threads of sinew between hands.
phofa - a species of moth that eats stored corn; the flower of a bulb.
phofa - as a pneumatic tyre; disappear, as a swelling.
phofadi - stubble; brittle parts of plants.
phofi - (same as "phofa"), the flower of a bulb.
phofile - has lost pressure, as a pneumatic tyre; has caused to disappear, as a swelling.
phofisa - cause to lose pressure, as a pneumatic tyre; has disappeared, as a swelling.
phofisitse - has caused to lose pressure; has caused to disappear, as a swelling.
phofisitswe - has been caused to puncture; has been caused to disappear, as a swelling.
phofisiwa - being caused to puncture; being caused to disappear, as a swelling.
phof6 - a flight.
phofu - an eland. Prov. phofu ya kganêla, ke ya kgosi.
phog6 - the crown of the head; the top of the head.
phogotlha - like a tree without knots; be quite exhausted and out of breath; sweat.
phogotlhile - has become smooth and round, like a tree without knots.
phogotlhê - probably something round and smooth.
phogotsêga - continue to scold. '.
phogwana - fontanelle.:.
phogwana ya moragê COMPL - posterior fontanelle.:.
phogwana ya pele compt - anterior fontanelle.
phohonyetso - 9n-, Similar to go sêba, a whisper.
phoiphomê6 - No as phophomd, a fulness; scum on the top of a full river; calabash, etc.
phoisa - cause to become blistered.
phoka - a species of creeping grass.
phoka - foam, or froth, as milk in a pail; stand out, as little tufts on a well-brayed skin; graze very early in the morning, as is done by milking cows. phoka mafulê 1.pur, foam at the mouth.
phokêlêla - talk loudly, or rave; brawl.
phokisa - cause to foam.
phokisitse - has caused to foam.
phokisiwa - being caused to foam.
phokiwa - being made to foam.
phêk6 - an uncastrated billy goat.
phoko - news; fame.
phoko-kgolo - No pL.,a great matter; a big scandal. Phokojê N. a AND 9N., and diphokojê, a silver jackal, or fox. PRov, Phokojê go tshela yo o dithêtsênaya.
phokophoko - 99., diphokophoko, a bird.
phokotsamodumê - N., silencer. phokotsêgêtlhwatlhwa _v. pur, depreciate.
phokots6 - 9n., a subtraction; a reduction; a decrease.
phola - a side hole, or chamber in a ground squirrel's warren.
phola - (same as "photsha"), jump down; jump off; dismount.
pholea - (same as "pholetha"), wander aimlessly; try with very little luck, or success.
pholêlê - t. 9n., a threshing place.
pholetha - (same as "pholea"), wander aimlessly, not knowing where one is going; Struggle with little success.
pholethêla - knowing where one is going.
pholethile - has wandered aimlessly.
pholethisa - caused to make vain attempts.
pholethisitse - has caused to make vain attempts.
pholethisiwa - being causeq to wander aimlessly; being made to Struggle in vain.
phêlê - cure. healing; health; soundness; full Tecovery of d health after an illness.
pholê - a harvest; a great harvest.
pholo - male adult animals, such as goats, oxen, etc.
pholodis6 - an induced abortion.
phologa - be helped with food; live by being helped with food.
phologile - has lived by being helped with food.
phologê - a descent. phdlêgôl6_N.n., a wild animal; an animal with divided hoofs; any strange, unknown thing; carbuncle; boil; abscess.
phololeditse - has caused to pierce, or strike right through.
phololêla - enter on one side and come out on another; pass the mark. |.
phololetsa - pierce, or strike, right through; cause to go through.
pholotsê - 9n., an abortion used of an animal.
phoma - as earth off a bank; break a wall.
phomaka - destroy walls by bringing them down.
phomeditse - has punched, or knocked down.
phomêga - as a wall, or an earth bank; crumble gradually. |.
phomêgêla - êga, collapse for; fall in or down, as earth pushed into a hole; Tush upon; attack or assault or take by storm.
phomegetse - has collapsed as the sides of a well, or the banks of a river.
phomegile - has collapsed; has crumbled gradually.
phomêla - as a wall; rush in; be quarrelsome.
phomêsêga - (same as "phomêga"), be collapsible, as a wall or earth bank.
phomesegetse - < phomesêgêla.
phomesegile - (same as "Phomegile"), has collapsed.
phomesetsa - êsêga, tramp in, as cattle at a drinking pool.
phometsa - knock down; punch; push down.
phometse - has pushed down for, as a wall.
phomile - has pushed down, as earth off a bank, or a wall.
phomilwe - has been pushed down, as earth off a bank.
phe moseditse - has caved in.
phomo sê - has pushed down for, as a wall; has rushed in.
phophaletse - has become disabled owing to lack of motive power.
phopheleditse - has filled up something that is nearly full already (D1.
phophi - 9N-, similar to thothi, a drop of liquid.
phophoma - swell, or bulge; rise, as boiling water.
phophomile - has swollen; has risen, as boiling water.
phophomisa - as boiling milk.
phophomisitse - has helped or caused to rise, as boiling milk.
phophomisiwa - being helped or caused to rise, as boiling milk.
phophorogêla - stand still with astonishment or dismay.
phophorogetse - has stood still with astonishment.
phophorogetswe - being in need of help; being desolate.
phophotha - pat; beat dust off.
phoraphorile - as in petting a child; has caressed and patted.
phorêgê - self-esteem; selfdeceit; state of being misled.
phori - rust in corn; mildew.
phorê - deceit.
phoro - EXPR, catch unawares; pounce upon.
phoroma - (same as "phoronya"), catch redhanded; find a hiding person; detect, or find out, an evil.
phoromeditse - < out liquid in a stream with a rushing noise.
phoromeditswe - Šs. < phoromeditse, has been poured out, as liquid in a stream, with a rushing noice.
phorometsa - find a hiding person; detect, or find out evil.
phoromile - has detected, or found out an evil; has caught red-handed.
phoromilwe - has been detected; has been caught red-handed.
phorongwa - being detected; being found, doing wrong and being brought to justice; being caught red-handed.
phêrorê - a steeply inclined riverbed; waterfall.
phorumêlê - 9n., unadvisedly.
phosê - a mistake; a miss at a mark; a failure; a failure of memory.
photha - thresh; thresh with cattle, or horses; beat grain out of the ear of corn.
phothaka - thresh much; thresh a lot of grain off the ear of corn.
phothama - a trophy. ieo =.
phothana - ub one another, as with sticks.
phothêga - be threshed; becoming separated from the grain.
phothegile - has become threshed.
phothêla - thresh for.
phothêlwa - being threshed for.
phothetse - has threshed for.
phothile - has threshed.
phothê - 9n-, similar to moôotlwana, which is more commonly used, a wooden pole for threshing corn.
phothoma - rape; lay hold of, after jumping on to.
phothomeditse - has poured out liquid with a noise.
phothomeditswe - has been poured out, as a liquid with a noise.
phothomêtsêga - (same as "poromêtsêga be poured out"), or rush out, as a rushing stream down a waterfall.
phothometsegile - has poured out, or rushed out, as a rushing stream.
phothêsêla - murmur, as water flowing down a waterfall.
phêthdsêld - 9N-, a waterfall; a cataract.
phêthêsetse - has murmured, as water flowing down a Lay waterfall; has cascaded, as water flowing in a river with broken sections.
photi - 9n-, a duiker venerated by the Bangwato. _.
phêtla - shred, as grains of maize from a cob.
phêtlaka - go past destinations; shred much maize from cobs; shred for great lengths of time.
phêtlêga - easy to be gone past, as an obscure place; easy to shred, as welldeveloped grains of maize.
photlegile - has become shredded.
photlêla - shred for.
photlêlwa - being shredded for.
photletse - has shredded for.
photletswe - has been shredded for.
phdtlha - a gap; an opening; a vacancy; a gap or opening in a hedge, etc.
photlile - has shredded, as maize grains from a cob.
photlisa - cause or help to shred, as when removing grains of maize from a cob.
photlisitse - has caused or helped to shred maize grains from a cob.
photlisiwa - being caused to shred maize grains from a cob.
photlokanye - has become very full; is broken.
photlok6 - 1p. exer, of becoming very full; of becoming broken. 1p. exer, pitsa potlokê, the pot is full; be full to the brim.
photlwana - the ends of the fingers. 1n. ExeR, tshwara photlwana, take hold of a thing lightly.
photsa - abort in the early months of pregnancy, of a woman.
photša - jump froma height.
photšaka - jump often, from height. photšêga _v.s.Neur, similar to betsêga, come out suddenly; make a sudden appearance; rush out, as a startled animal.
photšegile - has come out suddenly.
photšêla - jump from a height to, or for.
photšetse - has jumped from a height to, or for.
photšile - has jumped from a height.
phot8isa - help or cause to jump from a height.
photsisitse - has caused to jump from.
photšisiwa - being helped or caused to jump from a height.
photšiwa - the action of jumping from a height is being carried out.
phoufologê - 9n., a recovery of sight.
phoumeditse - has Poured out in a rush, or stream.
phoumêla - be rash, or to precipitate by word or action; rush in, as a fool. Phoumêlê Nn. ct. 9w., sinc. or diphoumêlôd, Tashneggprecipitation.
phoumetsa - pour Out in a rush or stream, as water or milk from a bucket.
phua - beat a skin, or carpet with a hand or stick in order to shake out the dust; throw down, uncaringly; abandon; let fall that which one was holding.
phuagana - as a weak person or a light thing; be abandoned; be in labour.
phuagantsê - has caused a weak person to fall down; has thrown a light thing down.
phuagantswê - has been abandoned; has been thrown down in a careless fashion.
phuaganya - cause to fall in an unkind manner; desert someone in the course of doing something tofether.
phuaganye - has fallen down as a weak person, or a helpless object.
phuantsê - has let go, fall or crumble something that one was holding.
phuanya - drop everything; abandon doing something suddenly.
phuduêgê6 - 9n., a commotion; a tumult.
phuduhudu - a small animal, called a steenbuck.
phuêga - be very tired; be exhausted; be weak from sickness; have blisters.
phuegile - has become very tired; has been abandoned and left in the lurch.
phukuts6 - on., a search; an examination.
phukwane - one who has conceived before reaching womanhood; has conceived while still very young. Phukwi Nn. cL. 99., sinc. or diPhukwi and boPhukwi, July.
phularê - 9n., a succession; a rota; the back part of a person, usually used in the plural. - phuld.n.,diphuld, a plucking, or gathering of fruit; grazing. pumisa v-S. caus, cause to be hospitable. phumusa V. Ss. siMP., Same as thelesa, supply, or give food; entertain by giving food; be phupu hospitable by supplying with food.
pumuseditse - (same as "phura P theleseditse"), has been hospitable to; has given food to guests, or visitors.
phumusetsa - (same as "thelesetsa"), be hospitable to; give food to.
phumusetsana - (same as "phumusetsanya give food"), etc. to one another as a sign of friendship.
phumusetsantsê - (same as "thelesetsantsê"), have given food, etc. to each other.
phumus6 - 9N-, hospitality; a gift of food, given to mark cordial relations.
phunngwa - be pierced; be operated on.
phuntsê - has broken into, etc.
phuntswê - has been pierced or broken into.
phunya - pierce; break into; strike water; stab; inject.
phunyaka - pierce many times; pierce easily, indiscriminately, etc.
phunyeditse - has made a hole for.
phunyêga - become burst; become pierced; be pierced successfully; water has been struck where drilling was done.
phunyêgêla - êga, become pierced for.
phunyegile - has become pierced.
phunyeleditse - has drilled or bored a hole through something. Phunyeletsa v.s.appL. oF phunyêla, drill, or bore a hole through something. Phunyetsa v.s. apPL. oF phunya, same as phunyêla, drill, or bore a hole for.
phuphama - starve to death; be lean or emaciated. Phuphame v.s.prr. < phuphama, has starved to death; has become very lean, or emaciated.
phuphura - crunch; chew hard substances, as pips, etc. N.CcL.9n., SING. oF diphupu, a tomb; a filledin grave. v.s.smp., crunch; crunch with the teeth; eat as a horse.
phuraka - crunch much; crush with teeth especially noisily, and excessively.
phuranya - (same as "phuraka"), crunch noisily and excessively.
phurany6 - huranya same as khuranyê, a grinding, or gnashing of teeth.
phurêga - crunchable, as a hard nut.
phuregile - has become crushed with teeth.
phurêla - crunch, or crush for.
phuretse - has crunched, or crushed for.
phuretswe - has been crunched for.
phurile - has crushed with teeth, noisily.
phurilwe - has been crunched or crushed with teeth.
phuruphuditse - has felt about; has searched for something by touch.
phuruphuditswe - has been searched for by touch.
phuruphutsa - feel about; search for something by touch.
phuruphutsaka - search for something all over by touch.
phuruphutsana - feel about each other's person, or things, in search of something; search one another.
phuruphutsegile - has been searched.
phutha - gather things together; collect; pack things in preparation for a journey; prepare corpse for funeral.
phuthaka - gather many things together; do much gathering of materials; gather many people; gather thoroughly.
phuthakantsê - has collected very many things.
phuthakanya - 1nr, collect many things.
phuthêga - be assembled; be gathered together.
phuthêgêla - êga, gather at, or for.
phuthêgêlê - a gathering, or assembly place.
phuthegile - have gathered, as people who are assembled; have been successfully gathered, as cattle that had strayed in different directions. 3.
phuthêgê - 9N-, an assembly; a gathering; a church up; a con, regation.; siinith eet goko: rally.
phuthêla - 9N-.
phuthêla - ),a bundle; a packet; a parcel.
phuthêla - gather for; wrap for; wrap up.
phuthile - has gathered things together; has collected; has packed things in preparation for a journey.
phuthilwe - things have been gathered together.
phutholodisa - cause or help to unwrap, as parcels.
phutholodisitse - has caused or helped to unwrap, parcels, etc.
phutholodisiwa - being caused or helped to unwrap, parcels, etc.
phuthologa - become spread out.
phuthologile - has become spread out.
phuthologê - a spreading out; relaxation; the firmament.
phutholola - spread out; explain; translate; unwrap, as a parcel; open a book.
phuthololê - n., an explanation; a commentary; a spreading out.
phuthololwa - being spread out, unwrapped, or explained; being translated.
phutholotsê - has spread out; has explained, or translated.
phutholotswê - has been spread out, unwrapped, explained, or translated.
phutlhaphutlha - blink, as with weak, or sore eyes.
phutlhaphutlhile - as with weak, or sore eyes.
phutsany6 - a mutual cursing.
phuts6 - a curse; a malediction.
pidiantsê - similar to kgweleantsê, has gathered together a large number of things; has killed large numbers of wild animals.
pidianya - similar to kgweleanya, gather together a large number of things; kill large numbers of wild animals.
pidisets6 - 9N., bidisa, container in which meal is fermenteg in readiness for cooking sour porridge.
pif6 - a look that is meant to rebuke; a cold, or fierce look; a reproof. properly; sala pila, remain well or Stay wel] hence goodbye. ' pila_N. N., similar to mmilg, a little path made by animals.
pilire - DIAL. vAR. of Dilisj.
pilisi_ - 9N-, DIAL. VAR op pilire, a pill; tablet [borrowed].
pilôê - a black patch of burnt grass; grass shoots growing in what was a burnt patch of grass.
pina - a ty Ne; a song; a dancing tune; a dance.
pinagare - 9N., a pillar, or centrepiece on which all the rest depend; centre pole of hut.
pinêlêla - (same as "pinyeletsa and thubêlêla"), rape; press down.
ping - a pinch, go ja ping. 1. Expr to pinch [borrowed].
pinka - delegate the watching to somebody by casting of lots.
pinyeleditse - has overpowered and pinned to the ground, ete.
pinyeleditswe - has been overpowered and pinned to the ground, etc.
pinyelediwa - being overpowered and pinned down, as citizens in a dictatorship, ete.
pinyeletsa - suppress, as in dictatorship; overpower and pin to the ground; rape.
pipêlê - bloat.
pipieditse - has deliberately and knowingly altered evidence; has twisted a statement that one has heard when repeating it.
pipietsa - deliberately and knowingly alter evidence; twist a statement that one has heard when repeating.
pipina - make blunt.
pipinêga - become blunt.
pipinegile - has become blunt.
pipinêla - as an axe.
pipini - rivets.
pipinnê - has made blunt.
pipitla - keep back part of a story; fail to tell all the news.
pipitlile - has kept back part of a story.
pipitlilwe - has been kept back, as part of a story, or news.
pipitlwa - being kept back, as part of a story, Or news.
pipololê - 9N-, an uncovering; an unveiling.
piriganye - has fallen heavily.
pirigi - Of falling.
pitiêla - 9N-, same as sedibê and sebata, a piece of oth cut for a patch.
pitiêlo - 9N-, a patch; a concealment of murder, etc.
pitika - moving it from its proper place.
pitikaka - turn things over, moving them from their former and proper place.
pitikêga - be movable, i.e. be able to move a thing by rolling it.
pitikegile - has been successfully moved from a former position by being turned or rolled over.
pitikêla - or place for.
pitikêlwa - being moved for, as a log, or barrel when turned over, or rolled.
pitiketse - has rolled for.
pitiketswe - has been rolled over for.
pitiki - 1p. exer, of rolling, as a log, or barrel.
pitikile - has rolled over; has turned something over when moving it from its former place.
pitikilwe - has been rolled over. Pitikisitse v.s.prr. < pitikisa, has caused or helped to turn over; has caused or helped to toll something by moving it from its former pitsa place. pitse Pitikisitswe v.s.pass. < pitikisitse, has been pitse caused or helped to roll something by moving it from its former place; has been pitsd caused to turn over.
pitikisiwa - (same as "pitikiswa being caused or helped to turn something by moving it from its former place").
pitikiwa - being rolled along, as a barrel; being turned and thus moved from a former position.
pitikogile - has been turned over.
pitikologa - be rolled over; be turned over.
pitikolola - turn a thing over without changing its position; turn a thing over, or round, while holding it in the hands; turn a thing upside down. v.s.simp,same as bitla, squeeze between the hands, or fingers; crush between two people or objects; rub the eyelid with the finger.
pitlagana - be crowded; be crushed; be in difficulty; be in trouble; feel very ill.
pitlaganngwa - being crushed; being put in difficulty; being caused to become very ill.
pitlagan6 - a crush; a difficulty.
pitlagantsê - has caused to be crowded; has squeezed, crushed, crowded, or pressed; has put in difficulty.
pitlagantswê - has been squeezed, or crushed.
pitlaganya - crowd; cause to become very ill; squeeze; crush; press upon; put into difficulties; cause to be crushed.
pitlaganye - has become crowded; has become crushed.
pitlêlêla - press upon; crush with as much force as possible.
pitleletsa - êlêla, press up; crush something. °.
pitleletse - has pressed upon, is crushing something with much force.
pitlolosa - (same as "pitlonosa"), which is rarely used, enlarge; make larger by removing hindrance or pressure.
pitlolosetsa - enlarge for; make larger by removing a hindrance.
pitlolositse - has made larger by removing a hindrance.
pitlolosiwa - being made larger by removing a hindrance.
pitlonosa - (same as "pitlolosa"), which is frequently used, enlarge; make larger by removing hindrance or pressure. N.CL.9N-, SING. OF dipitsa, a pot. N.CL.9N., SING. OF dipitse, a horse.
pObê - 9N-, dimple in cheek or chin.
pobêtsêga - have dimples; be dimpled.
pobo - (DJ, same as pobold, a sickness.
pobolê - 9N-, a sickness.
poboranê - [D}, fear; dread.
poborany6 - dread; dread (cause of); fear; fright.
podi - ¢, sina. fright commonly called phinya sa podi, ringworm.
podi - a goat; a flat, edible bulb with a small purple flower. podile dipodile, a blister beetle (badsmelling).
podisa - first ripe fruit; first fruits which rot instead of ripening.
podisadi - §adi [archaic], 2 nanny goat.
podisê - a decaying; a corruption.
podufalê - idleness; slothfulness.
poêlê - profit.
pofêlêl6 - a thorough binding up.
pogisêg6 - an affliction; a state of being oppressed.
pogis6 - an affliction; persecution; oppression.
pogê - (same as "selopê"), serdpd, gdpd, an elephant's trunk; snout. PpOg6 N.a suffering; a painful enduring.
poif6 - fear.
poitshêgê - 9N., dread; danger; jeopardy.
poitsh6 - (same as "poifisd"), fear; any cause of terror.
pokipoki - 149-, mask.
pôk6 - poetry.
pôkôlêl6 - 9n-, the death cry of an animal; a howling.
polaabaketeria - n., dipolaabaketeria same as polaamegare, antibiotic.
polaamegare - (same as "polaabaketeria"), antibiotic.
polamala - illegitimate child.
polane - |For), plan.
polanetariamo - planetarium [borrowed].
polanete - [ror planet.
pola6 - a killing; a slaughter; a murder.
polasetiki - 9N., (FOR) plastic.
polasi - ranch; farm [borrowed].
polatina - {For) platinum.
poledi - telling; a report.
polêla - 9N-, same as lobêlêla a sting.
polêlêlêpele - 9n., pry F. bolêla, tell, and pele, before, a prophecy; a telling beforehand. polêlê_N.ING. oF dipolêlê, telling; a report; an essay.
poletšha - (same as "pholetsha {ror} polish").
polo - a species of large iguana living in, or near water.
pol6 - 9N., penis, normally used as a vulgar word.
poloa - (same as "poloi"), wrinkle; a gather in sewing.
poloi - (same as "poloa"), a gather in sewing; wrinkle.
poloka - 9N-, similar to polokd, salvation; God's salvation.
polokangwad - museum.
polokêg6 - 9N-, a safe keeping; being saved.
polokêlôê - 9N-, siING. oF dipolokêlê, a place of safety; a garner; a granary; savings bank.
polokê - an action of salvation; protection. Polokwane N.Pietersburg.
polokwe - ot.
pololê - a departure; a going out; an exodus.
polomagwagwei - 99-, marine iguana.
polometsi - (same as "polo"), a water snake; a leguaan.
plone - polony; sausage [borrowed].
polwane - 9N-, pancreas; a mud brick, usually round and used when still wet.
pomile - has divided; has cut off.
pompê - 9N-, same as pongpong, the Anopheles mosquito.
pompdkgolo - 9-, mainpipe. pomponyêga_V.s.sIMP., same as pumpunyêga, issue forth, as water from a fountain; speak out boldly.
pomponyegile - (same as "pumpungegile"), has issued forth.
ponal6 - 9N-, an appearance; to show one's face.
ponatshêgêlê - 9n., a vision.
ponatshêg6 - 9N-, DIAL. VAR. oF pênagald, which is more commonly used, an appearance; a revelation; a manifestation.
pone - pony [borrowed].
pong - sore eyes in children.
pongwa - being cut off, etc.; being snuffed (of a candle).
ponka - (same as "mmoulê"), which is more frequently used, a mule; a hybrid grain.
ponkêla - go off to sleep.
ponketse - has gone off to sleep.
pond - sight; vision.
ponêdkgwedi - menstruation.
ponêphêrêg6 - %-, dipêndphdrêgê optical illusion.
pontsho - display.
ponyêga - burst out in song, or speech; break out. Ponyegile v.s.prr. < bonyêga, has burst forth in song, or speech.
ponyê - a twinkle; a winking. ponyê ya leitlh6 1w.exrr, lit., in the twinkle of an eye; in a moment.
popamê - thinness through starvation, or some other illness.
popêg6 - a condition, or formation, the natural habits, or qualities of a person; the nature of anything; characteristic features.
popêlêl6 - a file of things; a row; one coming after another; a procession; a group of people protesting in favour of, or against something.
popêlê - the womb.
pop6 - a threat.
pop6 - a creation; a natural habit, or formation.
popoa - punish slightly by slapping, or tapping.
popoile - or tapping.
popoleri - 9N-, [For\ poplar.
popoma - a bulge; a swelling; something that stands out.
popomaditse - has caused to swell, or bulge as a corpse, or carcase; has made outstanding, or conspicuous.
popomaditswe - has been caused to swell, or bulge as a carcase or corpse.
popomala - swell, as a dead animal; rise as a full river.
popomalwa - being swollen, or bloated as a carcase, or corpse.
popomatsa - cause to swell or bulge as a dead animal; cause something to be raised above its surroundings.
popometse - has swollen, as a dead animal; has risen, as a full river.
popometswe - being swollen, or bloated, as a carcase, or corpse, etc.
popdmmele - physiology.
poporogetswe - has been in trouble.
pdpêta - difficulty.
popêtla - bother by too much talking; talk when others are silent; continue to eat when others are finished.
popdêtlêga - be talking when others are silent.
poraemari - primary. b fat [borrowed].
poraemasetôf6 - 9N-, primus stove [borrowed].
porofeta - (same as "bolêlêla pele prophesy").
porofetile - has prophesied.
porojeketara - projector [borrowed].
porêma - make a sound, as a musical instrument; low, as a cow.
poromeditse - has poured a liquid in large quantities.
porometsa - pour a liquid in large quantities.
poromile - has made a sound, as a musical instrument.
porêpê - cork [borrowed].
pêrêpêtla - leak a lot, as a house in which the pattering or dripping of water is heard.
porêpotlile - has leaked a lot, as a house in which the pattering or dripping of water was heard.
pordêsa - prose [borrowed].
poroteine - protein [borrowed].
porêtla - as a pot or wooden vessel; bleed profusely.
pêrêtlaka - leak a lot, as a pot; bleed profusely and in many places.
pêrdtlêla - talk incessantly; continue talking; bleed profusely for; leak, to the detriment of.
porotletse - has talked incessantly; has bled profusely; has leaked, to the detriment of.
porwane - a tenor voice [borrowed].
poseleine - 99-, |For] china; porcelain.
posophafi - 9n-, airmail.
pota - be located; go round something.
pota - talk nonsense.
potaka - talk a lot of nonsense.
potapêtêla - êta, move or run around in circles for.
potêla - skulk; get behind, rub skins or riems between the hands with a grinding or revolving movement when braying.
potetse - has skulked; has rubbed skins or riems between the hands with a grinding or revolving movement when braying.
potile - has gone round something; is situated, etc.
potilwe - has been gone round something.
potlaka - hurry; be in eager haste; be confused through haste; bother oneself about something.
potlakaka - hurry; be overhasty.
potlakêla - hasten for, or to.
potlakêlwa - be hasteneq for or to.
potlaketse - has hastened for or to.
potlaketswe - being hastened for, or to.
potlakile - has hastened eagerly.
potlakisa - cause or help to hurry; cause a person to hurry, by speaking to him.
potlakisitse - has caused or helped to hurry.
potlakisiwa - being caused or helped to hurry.
potlakiwa - being hurried; hurrying being done.
potlakôê - hurry; eager haste.
potlama - be weak-kneed.
potlame - has shown signs of weakness; is weak-kneed.
pêtlana - s, small; few. 1p. EXxPR, kgetsi e potlana, an easy matter.
potlolôtê - 9, same as pensele, pencil [borrowed].
potoka - roll up; mould into a ball.
potokana - fall down to the ground.
potokantsê - has let fall; has made to drop; has moulded.
potckanya - cause to fall, let fall; drop.
potokanye - has fallen down to the ground.
potokêla - mould for.
potokile - has moulded.
potokisa - cause or help to mould.
potokisitse - has caused or helped to mould.
potokisiwa - being caused or helped to mould.
potoko - 1p. Expr, of falling and rolling on the ground.
potokwane - [D., 2 species of black antelope.
potokwe DER - s., is round, or cylindrical.
potokwe - 9N-, a roll; anything rolled up tightly; a cylinder.
potologêla - go round an object for; go round about for.
potologile - has gone round an object; has taken a roundabout way.
potologiwa - be gone round; be circled; be encompassed.
potologwa - (same as "potologiwa"), be gone round; be circled; be encompassed.
potonoga - (same as "potologa which is more frequently used"), go round an object; make a circuit; encompass; walk puê around; go round about.
potsa - a betrothal feast at which an ox is slaughtered.
potsane - a kid.
pots6 - 9N-, a question.
pou - (same as "pounama lip"),. Beaama N. lip. PRov., phuduhudu e feta lerwana pounama di botlhoko.
pšela - êga_v.s. NeuT, vulgar expression for to have diarrhoea.
puana - (same as "kuana acap made of skin"),; a small leather sack made of one skin; a wallet; a satchel.
puane - similar to kuane a skin or fur cap.
puandê - (same as "tshêband"), backbiting; idle talk.
pubagadi - one of the smaller bones used by a witchdoctor in his divination.
pubalê - ¢.,a divination bone that is smaller than moremogolo and represents wife or mistress.
pududu - s, a male animal that is grey; a thing that is grey or dark blue.
pudula - something blown up like a balloon; a swelling; a bubble; a blister.
pudulê - a blast; a snorting noise. Pudulogê n.n., similar to tlhabologê, a swelling; a growing up; an awakening; a becoming vilised.
pudumê - (same as "kgokong"), a gnu; a blue wildebeest.
pudungwana - a species of small bird very destructive to corn. prov., ba phunyeditse pudungwane dintsi.
pudutswana - s., DIM. OF pududu, a female grey animal.
puêlêgê - ABs. N. CL. 9N-, DER F. buêlêga, a state of desiring or seeking rebuke.
puisan6 - dialogue.
puisanyê - (same as "puisand"), dialogue.
pula - Botswana currency; when used interjectively, it means: greetings.
pulamadibogê - 14¢, pioneer.
puld - %-, opening.
punka - s, strong arch.
punê - DER. < buna [arcu], a bite of something. N.speech; a speech; language; a matter, or a case to be discussed; a case to be tried.
pupu - (same as "sephinya"), voided wind. puputla mosi v.pur, make a lot of smoke.
puputleditse - has fanned a flame.
puputletsa - fan a flame.
purapura - ceremonial gown; long loose outer garment, robe, including one that is worn as an indication of rank.
purune - prune [borrowed].
pus6 - a reign; dominion; a part of a kingdom.
pusolos6 - vengeance; revenge. pusônosi_N. dictatorship.
putla - search diligently; look for in many places; poke with horns from side to side; strike a limb, very hard, with the result that it breaks in two.
putlagana - be broken, as a stick; break.
putlagantsê - has broken into distinct bits with both hands.
putlaganya - as a thick but very dry stick.
putlaganye - is broken, as a very dry stick.
putlaputla - look hard for something; search diligently and thoroughly.
putlêga - breakable, as a dry stick.
putlêla - half or part of a broken spear handle, stick or axe handle.
putlêla - or snap for.
putlile - has searched diligently, etc.
putlisa - drive men by force or authority; cause to look for.
putlisitse - has driven men by force or authority; has caused to look for; has helped to break a dry stick.
putlisiwa - being driven as men by force; being caused to look for; being caused or helped to break a dry stick. putliwa_v.s. Pass, being searched diligently.
putsa - pour out, as do tears.
putsitse - have poured out, as do tears.
putsologê - a relapse.
putswa - s, blue; dark grey.
putswana - s., DIM. oF putswa, blue; dark grey (used only to qualify female animals).
putuka - (same as "potoka"), bring, or'add together, as different herds of cattle.
putukantsê - (same as "potokantse"), has summarised; has brought together.
putukanya - pass quickly from one job to another; press with a variety of arguments.
putukêlêla - press upon, or Overcome with arguments; press upon, or push into a corner, or narrow space; being together.
putukeletse - has pressed upon or overcome with arguments; has pressed upon, or pushed into a corner.
putuketse - has pressed upon, ete.
putukile - has brought, or added together, as different herds of cattle.
