ra - +2aPasrsc, in compound tenses; consisting of two or more vbs., re ne ra rêka, we bought; re ka tlaa ra seka ra rêka, we might not buy.
raana - Say to each other. ] raanye v.s.PFT. < raand, have said to each other.
raba - rubber; eraser [borrowed].
rabana - snarl at each other; be dashed to pieces.
rabantsê - has caused to snarl at each other.
rabanya - cause to snarl at each other; throw down and break.
rabanyêga - Similar to ranyêga, become cracked, as earthenware, china or crockery.
rabasepontšhe - 9-, foam rubber [borrowed].
rabêla - [D.], shadow.
rabetse - has shadowed.
radibenya - ¢, jeweller.
radietara - ¢-, radiator [borrowed].
radikgaratlhane - 14¢-, one of the impersonations of a demi-god in the female initiation ceremony; a dance in the bojale ceremony.
radikgomo - ¢-, veterinary officer.
radile - has drawn a line; has cut a line, as in skinning an animal, or ploughing.
radilwe - a line has been drawn.
radiphaephe - 1Ao-, plumber.
radisa - cause or help to draw a line; explain.
radisitse - has caused or helped to draw a line.
radisitswe - has been caused or helped to draw a line.
radisiwa - being caused or helped to draw a line; being helped to cut a line, as when skinning an animal.
radiwa - (same as "ralwa"), being drawn, as a line. Tae N.CL.9¢-, SING. OF dirae [borrowed], rye.
raêla - tempt; set a trap for; ensnare in speech.
raêlêsêga - become tempted; succumb to temptation.
raelesegile - has become tempted; has succumbed to temptation. | raêlwa v.s. Pass. < raêla, being tempted; being ensnared, etc.
raetse - has tempted; has ensnared. Re.
raetswe - has been tempted.
rafa - as corn; take minerals out of a mine, corn out of sack, etc.
rafaka - as corn, etc.
rafêla - take corn, etc. out of one vessel and put in another vessel for.
rafetse - has taken out of one vessel and put in another vessel for, as corn, etc.
rafile - has taken out of a thing and putin another.
rafilwe - has been taken out of a thing by hand.
rafisa - cause or help to take out and put in a vessel as corn, etc.
rafisiwa - being helped to take out and put in a vessel, as corn, etc.
rafiwa - as minerals, or corn out of a sack, etc.
rafodisa - help or cause to raffle; help, or cause to shred.
rafodisitse - has helped or caused to raffle.
rafodisitswe - has been helped or caused to raffle.
rafodisiwa - being helped or caused to raffle.
rafola - raffle; shred into strands.
rafola - separate, or take out little by little; divide cattle into small groups so as not to overcrowd when drinking.
rafolaka - raffle a lot, or often.
rafole - a raffle [borrowed].
rafolêla - raffle for.
rafolêlwa - being raffled for.
rafotsantsê - have followed in succession; have gone one after another with short intervals in between.
rafotsanya - follow in succession; go one after another with short intervals.
rafotsê - has separated, or taken out little by little.
raga - kick out, as a leg.
ragaka - kick a lot; struggle to get free, by kicking about; be restless; be delirious.
ragakantsê - has thrown things into disarray by kicking.
ragakanya - kick about and in all directions.
ragêla - kick for.
ragetse - has kicked for.
ragetswe - has been kicked for.
ragile - has kicked. rrrrs—"(:issšsšsSCSDS.
ragilwe - has been kicked.
ragisitse - has caused or helped to kick. ragisitswe vV.S.Pass. < ragisitse, has been caused or helped to kick.
ragisiwa - (same as "ragiswa being caused or helped to kick"),. ragiswa see ragisiwa. ae.
ragiwa - (same as "ragwa"), being kicked.
ragoga - start to run very fast; run with all speed.
ragogêla - or towards.
ragogetse - has run very fast at or towards.
ragogile - has run with all speed.
ragogisitse - has caused to run very fast. ragogisitswe < ragogisitse, has been caused to run very fast.
ragogisiwa - being caused to run very fast.
ragola - rush at an animal and drive it away from others; cut an animal's sinews; cut with a jerking movement upwards.
ragotsê - has rushed at an animal and driven it away from others.
ragwa - (same as "ragiwa"), being kicked.
raka - a set of drawers; a cupboard; rack; cabinet [borrowed].
raka - arrive before time; precede; arrive before another, taking a different route; be before another in doing or saying.
rakadi - a single male wildebeest.
rakaladitse - has caused to relax; has made to sit leisurely.
rakalala - sit leisurely; relax; float, like a boat. prov. o se bênê nong go rakalala godimo go ya fatshe ke ga yênê.
rakalatsa - cause to relax, or sit leisurely.
rakaletse - has sat leisurely; has relaxed; has caused to arrive simultaneously from different directions.
rakana - arrive, or meet, coming from different directions; meet by coming across one another.
rakane - have arrived, or met coming from different directions.
rakanêla - meet at; meet over.
rakanetse - has met at; has met over.
rakanya - cause to arrive, or meet, coming from different directions.
rakanye - (same as "rakane"), have arrived, or met, coming from different directions.
rakgadi - 1A¢-, a father's sister; a parental aunt.
rakgwêb6 - 1Ae, businessman.
rakhemisi - 9¢-, ING. oF borakhemisi chemist [borrowed].
rala - draw a line; cut a line, as in skinning, or ploughing; go in a straight line; be consistent.
raladitse - has caused to go across, a forest, a field, etc.
raladitswe - has been caused to cut across open country, etc.
ralala - pass through; go from place to place; cut across, in going from one place to another; visit and spend a night with a fiancêe at her father's house. ns. The custom of premarital sexual intercourse between a fiancê and a fiancêe who are recognised as such by parents on both sides has not yet disappeared.
ralalêla - pass through for.
ralalêlwa - being passed through for.
ralalêtse - has passed through for.
ralaletswe - has been passed through for.
ralalwa - being passed through; etc.
ralatsa - cause to go across; cause to cut across.
ralefapha - 14¢-, head of department.
ralêgile - has become inscribed.
ralegonyane - (same as "leso-la-mae rhombic egg-eater").
ralêla - draw a line for; cut a line, as in skinning, for.
ralephalê - 149-, a veterinary assistant.
ralešane - 14¢, species of brown wasp with a very painful sting.
raletse - has drawn a line for.
raletswe - a line has been drawn for.
raloditse - has caused to run about, as calves at play.
raloka - run about, as calves at play.
ralokêla - run about for, as calves at play.
raloketse - has run about for as calves at play.
ralokile - has run about, as calves at play.
ralokisa - cause or help to run about, as calves at play.:.
ralokisitse - has caused to run about, as calves at play.
ralokisiwa - has been caused to run about, as calves at play.
ralotsa - cause to run about, as calves at play.
ralwa - being cut, as a line made when skinning; being drawn, as a line made on something.
rama - oralise; co-operate unexpectedly.
ramaanêkag6 - 1Ae, architect.
ramabole - ¢-, boxer.
ramaga - s, See app. p. xvii, red-brown with mixed small markings of white in cattle; blue mixed with small markings of white, as in soap.
ramatla - begin to walk, as a toddler. Ramatlabama N.CL. 14¢-, SING., most southerly railway siding on the north-to-south rail line in Botswana.
ramatlile - has done something clumsily.
ramatlisitse - has caused to behave clumsily.
ramatlisitswe - has been caused to behave clumsily.
ramatlisiwa - being caused to behave clumsily.
ramatswele - ¢-, boxer.
rametlae - ¢, own.
ramodula - ¢, stamen.
ramogola - ¢-, a species of creeper.
ramogolo - ¢, same as rrêmogolo, grandfather; older brother to one's father. Ramokgwebana N.A4¢, most northerly railway siding on the north-to-south rail line in Botswana.
ramolangwana - 1A¢-, secretary bird.
ramolem6 - ¢., dispenser of medicines and drugs.
ramotse - 14¢.,mayor. ramotsholakakgetsi_N. -, abductor.
ramphêêtšhane - 14¢-, sandles.
ramphêlêga - [D., progress slowly, as a child learning to walk.
ramphelegile - (Dj, has progressed slowly as a child learning to walk.
rangwana - ¢, to rangwana, of a child; a father's younger brother.
rangwane - 1A¢-, a father's younger brother; a paternal uncle.
ranka - similar to gwanta, walk and behave in a boisterous, or boastful manner.
ranodisa - cause or help to clarify; translate; interpret, etc.
ranodisitse - has caused or helped to clarify; translate; interpret, etc.
ranodisitswe - has been caused or helped to clarify; translate; interpret, etc.
ranodisiwa - being caused or helped to clarify; translate; interpret, etc.
ranogêla - become clear, plain and understandable to, or for.
ranogile - has become plain and clear, as a matter that has been explained.
ranola - speak out plainly, as one not wishing to deceive; clarify, interpret, etc.
ranolêga - explainable; be satisfactorily explained.
ranolegile - has become clear; has become explainable; has been satisfactorily explained.
ranolêla - make clear to; translate into.
ranolêlana - explain or make clear, to each other.
ranolêlwa - being explained to; being made clear for.
ranoletse - has made clear to; has translated into, or for.
ranotsê - has explained and made clear.
ranta - highest currency unit of the R.S.A., rand [borrowed].
rantlhasi - ¢-., brown bread.
rantsê - has broken something with a kerrie.
rantsha - cause to break, or crack.
rantshitse - has caused to break, or crack.
rantshitswe - has been caused to break, or crack.
rantswê - has been broken, or cracked by.
ranya - walk stealthily in a stooping position; break something with a kerrie; make marks on the body; tattoo the body. ranyêga V: S. NEUT:, similar to rabanyêga, be cracked, as earthenware, china, or crockery.
rapaladitse - has caused to lie, or stretch across, as a string.
rapaladitswe - has been caused to lie, or stretch across, as a string.
rapaladiwa - (same as "rapalatswa"), being caused to lie, or stretch across, as a String.
rapalatswa_V.S. Pass - (same as "rapaladiwa").
rapalêga - cause to become lain, or stretched across, as a string; be placed crosswise, in any direction.
rapalegile - has caused to become lain, or stretched across, as a string.
rapaletse - has lain, or stretched across, as a string, a batten on a door, etc. rapama vV.Ss.sIMP.,recline, or lie on the side; use, cut across, or go by a short route. 1D. ExPR, rapama ka mpa ya sebete.
rapame - has reclined, or lain on the side of the body.
rapamêla - recline, or lie on the side, for.
rapametse - has reclined, or lain on the side, for; has reclined for, etc. rapamisa vV.s. caus, cause to lie down; cause to recline, etc.
rapamisetsa - cause to lie down for; lay stretched on the ground for.
rapamisitse - has caused to lie down.
rapamisitswe - has been caused to lie down.
rapamisiwa - being caused to lie down.
rapamologa - get up froma reclining position, get up from lying on the side, or back. '.
rapamologêla - get up from a reclining position, for.
rapamologile - has got up from a reclining position. Trapedisa v.s.caus. < rapêla, cause to pray; pray with; pray hard.
rapedisitse - has made to pray; has helped to entreat. Tapedisitswe v.s. pass. < rapedisitse, has been made to pray; has been assisted in prayer. Tapedisiwa v.s. pass. < rapedisa, being made to pray; being assisted in prayer. Trapêga v.s.NEUT. (DJ, be lying on the side.
rapêla - entreat; ask for clemency; plead.
rapêlana - pray to each other; entreat one another.
rapêlêga - be pacified; become placated.
rapêlêla - pray, entreat, plead, etc., for.
rapêlêlana - pray for one another; entreat one another.
rara - 1A¢-, a father; a man old enough to be a father; a very senior leader.
rara - approach and retreat from, as in dancing; spin, as a spider its web; interweave; entwine.
raraana - become entangled; become complex.
raraanngwa - being entangled.
raraantsê - has entangled.
raraantswê - has been entangled.
raraanwa - being entangled.
raraanya - entangle; intertwine.
raraanye - has become entangled, or complex.
raraanyeditse - has made things difficult for; has told falsehoods about; has published false stories about.
raraanyeditswe - things have been made difficult for.
raraanyediwa - being entangled for.
raraanyeleditse - has accused falsely; has told lies about another.
raraanyetsa - make matters difficult for; tell falsehoods about.
rarabolodisa - help to explain.
rarabolodisitse - has helped to explain.
rarabolodisitswe - has been helped to explain.
rarabolodisiwa - being helped to explain.
rarabologa - become unravelled, or explained.
rarabologêla - become unravelled, or explained, for.
rarabologêlwa - recover oneself; come to oneself, as one demented.
rarabologile - has become clear, unravelled or explained.
rarabolola - explain, make understood; reason out; simplify things.
rarabololwa - being unravelled; being explained.
rarabolotsê - has explained; has made understood.
rarabolotswê - has been explained; has been unravelled, as a puzzle.
raraeletsa - similar to rareetsa, entangle for.
rareeditse - has entangled for.
rareetsa - similar to raraeletsa, entangle for.
rarêga - or become dismayed.
raregile - has become dismayed.
raro - S. See app. p. xvii, three.
rarologa - become untangled.
rarologantsê - similar to farologantsê, has made a distinction.
rarologanya - similar to farologanya, make a distinction; separate, or distinguish.
rasefofane - 1A9-, pilot.
rasemausu - 14¢, hawker.
rasephiphi - 149-, vaginal discharge; gonorrhoea.
rasite - a receipt [borrowed].
rata - love; like; will; wish; want.
ratakwane - ¢, forktailed drongo.
ratana - love, or like one another; have sexual intercourse.
ratara - radar [borrowed].
rataro - s.,See app. p. xvii, same as tshelêla six.
ratedisa - cause or help to approach stealthily; cause or help to approach game under cover.
ratedisitse - has caused or helped to approach stealthily; has caused or helped to approach game under cover.
ratedisitswe - has been caused or helped to approach stealthily, etc.
ratedisiwa - being caused or helped to approach stealthily; being caused or helped to approach game under cover.
ratêga - be loveable; be likeable; be liked; be favoured; be loved; be precious.
rategile - has become loved liked, favoured, etc.; has become lovable.
ratêla - love, or like for.
ratêla - approach stealthily; approach game under cover.
ratha - as lightning; chop; split up wood; cut up a carcase of an animal.
rathathe - ¢-,a species of long thatching grass.
rathêga - as by lightning; be chopped, as wood; has become cut up as an animal carcase.
rathêla - chop, split up wood, etc., for.
rathêla - conceive before weaning a child at an acceptable age; fall pregnant while still breastfeeding.
rathile - as lightning; has chopped; has split up wood; has cut up, like a carcase of an animal.
rathilwe - has been struck chopped, or cut up.
rathipana - ¢, man who does rcumcisions at the boys' initiation ceremony.
rathisa - cause or help to dismember a carcase.
rathisitse - has caused or helped to strike, or chop up a carcase.
rathisitswe - has been caused or helped to strike, or chop up, etc.
rathisiwa - being helped or caused to strike, etc.
rathodisa - cause or help to make a large quantity of beer.
rathodisitse - has caused to make a large quantity of beer.
rathodisitswe - has been caused to make a large quantity of beer.
rathodisiwa - being caused to make a large quantity of beer.
rathola - make a large quantity of beer.
rathwa_v.s. pass - (same as "rathiwa"), being struck by lightning; being chopped, or cut up. ip. EXPR, go rathwa ke mpa.
ratile - has loved, liked, willed, wished wanted, etc.
ratilwe - has been loved, liked willed, wished, wanted, etc.
ratisa - cause or make to love, like, etc.
ratisitse - has caused or made to love, like, etc.
ratisitswe - has been caused or made to love, like, etc.
ratisiwa - being caused or made to love, like, etc.
ratiwa - (same as "ratwa"), being loved liked, ete.
ratlalala - speak, sing, or cry together; shout out together, as an excited crowd.
ratlaletse - have spoken, sung or cried together.
ratlatla - roar, like a lion.
ratlatlile - has roared, like a lion. ratsuru_N.CL.1A9-, SING. OF boratsuru, lemon.
ratwa - (same as "ratiwa").
raya - Say; Mean.
re - + 2A 1ST PERS. PL.oc. < o are bona, he sees us.
re - + 2A 1ST PERS. [SHORT FORM] < re bôna we see.
re - S., used iN DER. CONJ. FORMS, signifies "when", as in ya re, and when; e tlaa re, and when it will.
re - say, do, ba re ba a itse, they say they know. y.S. INF, used as a cons. to signify "that"; ke ne re ka bona go re botoka ke tsamayê, I found that (it) was better I went away.
reba - reba logala appease; bring to peace.
rebile -: rebola vV.S.SIMP., permit; release; emancipate; restore, or give back; pay back; set free, as a servant whose time is up. R.
rebolêlwa - being permitted the use of; being given, or entitled to.
reboletse - has permitted (one) the use of; has allowed (one) to use a thing. reboletswe vV.S. PASS. < reboletse, has been permitted the use of; has been allowed to use a thing.
rebolwa - be permitted; be released; be given permission.
rebotsê - has permitted released, or emancipated.
rebotswê - has been permitted released, or emancipated.
redimogêla - be slippery, or impermeable, as an oily object, for, or to.
redimogetse - has become slippery, or impermeable, for, or to, as an oily object.
redimogile - as an oily object; has shone a little.
redimog6 - shine a little, as a wet stone or a bald head; be slippery, or impermeable, as an oily object.
redimosa - cause to shine; make slippery, or impermeable.
redimositse - has caused to shine in a dull manner; has made slippery, or impermeable.
redimosiwa - being caused to shine in a dull manner; being made slippery, or impermeable, and hence difficult to hold.
reedisa - cause or help to listen; attend to a matter with someone ina supporting role and as an interested party.
reedisitse - has caused or helped to listen; has attended to a matter involving a colleague, friend, or relative, ina supporting role, hence as an interested party.
reedisitswe - has caused or helped to listen.
reedisiwa - being caused or helped to listen.
reeditse - has listened; has listened carefully.
reeditswe - listening has been done; has been listened to. Teediwa v.s. pass. < reetsa, being listened to.
reeleditse - has listened for.
rêêlêla - distort, or misrepresent.
rêêlêlwa - being named for, or after; being cast with an evil spell; being wished evil.
reeletsa - attend for; listen on behalf of; stand in, at a meeting.
reeletse - has named for, or after; has wished someone evil.
rêêlêtswe - has been named for, or after; has been wished evil.
reetsa - listen; attend. refoleketara_N. cL. 9N-, SING. oF direfoleketara [borrowed], reflector. reia_vV.S.SIMP. [borrowed], Similar to thotha, or rora [FOR, ride; transport.
reile - has told.
reintlwe - huge lion; a huge, fierce man.
reise - 99-, rice [borrowed].
rêka - buy; purchase.
rêkaka - buy, or purchase much, or many.
rêkalana - «Ec. < rêkêla, trade together; buy from each other.
rêkana - to pay for a repeat of a song, as at a concert; pay for services rendered mutually.
rekeditse - has smoothed.
rêkêga - be marketable, as commodities that fetch high prices, or are selling fast. rêkêgêla_v.s.simp., being shown pity or love; being shown concern for, etc.
rekegetse - has shown pity or love; has shown concern for; has become considerate towards.
rekegetswe - has been shown pity or love; has been shown concern for; has been well treated.
rekegile - has fetched good prices, or sold well.
rekêla - ance a riddle in an attempt to regain the upper hand.
rêkêtê - 9N-, rackets [borrowed].
reketla - move from side to side as a weak person walking; waver; to shake; to have palsy.
reketlana - be crumbly, or almost falling apart, as a structure, or vehicle.
reketlêga - be shaken; be shakeable.
reketlegile - is or was shaken; has become shaken.
reketlile - has tottered; has moved from side to side, as a weak person.
reketlisa - cause to become rickety; cause to totter; move from side to side.
reketlisitse - has made rickety; has caused to totter, etc.
reketsa - [D).
reketse - has bought of; has bought for.
rekile - has bought:.
rekilwe - has been bought.
rekisa - sell.
rekiseditse - has sold to, or for.
rekiseditswe - has been sold to, or for.:.
rekisediwa - being sold to, or for.
rekisêga - be anxious; be troubled.
rekisegile - has become anxious, or troubled in spirit.
rekisetara - register [borrowed].
rekisetsa - sell to, or for.
rekisitse - has helped to buy; has sold.
rekisitswe - has been helped to buy; has been sold.
rekisiwa - being sold.
rekiwa - êkwa, being bought; buying being done.
rekolola - buy back; redeem; ransom.
rekololwa - being bought back, redeemed, etc.
rekolotsê - has bought back.
rekolotswê - has been bought back.
rêkôt6 - 9¢-, record [borrowed].
rêkwa - (same as "rekiwa"), being bought.
reledisa - cause to slip, or be slippery.
reledisitse - has swallowed food without chewing; has caused to slip.
reledisitswe - has been swallowed, as food, without chewing; has been caused to slip.
reledisiwa - being caused to slip.
releditse - has swallowed food without chewing.
releditswe - has been swallowed, ds food, without chewing.
rêlêla - slip; slip away; slip out of the hands; break a promise.
rêlêlwa - being broken, as a promise; being slipped.
relema - tell a different story from that told before.
relemile - has told a different story from that told before.
reletsa - cause to slide, or slip; swallow food without chewing.
rêma - become curdled, as milk, or clotted, as blood.
rêma - chop; hew; paw, as a horse; brake.
rêmagantsê - has chopped indiscriminately.
rêmagantswê - has been chopped, or hacked to pieces.
remaganya - chop, or hack to pieces for.
rêmaganyeditse - has chopped to pieces for.
rêmaganyeditswe - has been chopped to pieces for. rêmaganyediwa v.Ss. PASS. < rêmaganyetsa, being chopped to pieces for. rêmaganyetsa vV.s. APPL. OF rêmaganya, chop into pieces for.
rêmaka - chop a large quantity; cut trees indiscriminately.
rêmakile - has chopped a large quantity.
rêmakiwa - (same as "rêmakwa being chopped indiscriminately").
rêmakwa - (same as "rêmakiwa").
rêmana - cut each other, with an axe.
rêmane - have cut each other.
rêmêga - be disillusioned.
remegile - has become chopped has become disillusioned.
rêmêla - break for.
remile - has chopped; has braked (a wagon or car); has become, or is curdled, as milk; has pawed.
remilwe - has been chopped.
remisa - cause to turn sour; cause or help to chop; caused to break.
remisitse - has caused to turn sour; has caused to chop; has caused to brake.
remisitswe - has been caused to chop; has been caused to brake.
remisitswe - has been caused to turn sour.
remisiwa - being caused to turn sour; being caused or helped to chop; being caused or helped to brake.
remiwa - êngwa, being chopped; being made sour; being braked.
remolola - ease the brakes, as on a wagon, etc.
remolotsê - has released the brakes, as on a wagon, etc.
rêna - lord over; act, as a ruler, etc.
rêngwa - (same as "remiwa"), being chopped.
rênkê - 9¢-, rank [borrowed].
rêntê - rent [borrowed].
renya - (same as "thenya"), show feeble signs of life; induce an animal to produce more milk.
reologa - return; come back; fall from the place where put; fall from a place to which a person has climbed.
reologile - has fallen from the place where put.
reolola ' - bring back, or upon, or against; cut meat into thick pieces; cut meat off the one. PP iscoe v.s. PFT. < reolola, has brought back; has cut meat into thick pieces.
rêpa - become slack, or loose. rêpêla vV.S. APPL. sink down, as something that has been hit. f rêpêlêla_v.s. INT. Tun down, as oil, or syrup.; repeletse V-S.PFT. < rêpêlêla, has run down as oil, S' le — < rêpêla, has sunk down, as rep' something that has been hit. '.
rephaboliki - 9g-, republic [borrowed].
repisa - make slack, or loose.
repiseditse - has made slack or loose for.
repisetsa_ - make slack, or loose or.
repisiwa - being made slack, or loose.;:.
repologa - descend in a line, as cattle from a hill. j.
repologêla - descend in a line, as cattle from a hill.
repologile - as cattle from a hill.
rêra - preach; conspire; talk over, or discuss a matter in private; terrify; fascinate, as a snake a bird.
reregile - has become terrified startled, or dismayed.
reregisa - cause to be afraid.
reregisitse - has terrified; has caused to be afraid.
reregisiwa - being terrified.
rêrêkêla - walk with a stagger, as if about to fall.
rêrêkêtse - has walked with a swaying gait, as if about to fall.
rêrêla - preach to; conspire against.
rêrêra - startle; terrify; make afraid.
reretse - has preached to, or for.
reretswe - has been preached to. reriwa_v.s. Pass, Same as rêrwa, being preached; being fascinated, as a bird by a snake, etc.
rêrwa - (same as "reriwa"),. Tesepe N.CL.9N-, SING. OF diresepe [borrowed], recipe.
resetšhurêntê - 9n-, restaurant. Tesine N., resin [borrowed].
rêta - give a name to, either surname, or._ pet name; pet.
rêtana - give a name to each other; praise one another.
retela - be too difficult.
reteleditse - has hindered; has prevented.
retelêla - be too hard for; be too much for; hinder.
retelêlwa - being unable to do; being hindered.
reteletsa - hinder; prevent.
reteletse - was too hard for; is too much for; has become too hard for; has become too much for.
reteletswe - has been unable to accomplish.
retetsê - has become too difficult impossible, or manageable.
retetsha - (same as "reteletsa").
retha - batter, with the head, or blunt object.
rethaka - knock against, or on many times.
rethana - knock against one another.
rethane - have knocked against each other.
rethefaditse - has made smooth; has flattered; has deceived by unfair promises.
rethefaditswe - has been made smooth; has been flattened.
rethefadiwa - being made smooth; being flattened.
rethefala - become smooth; act deceitfully.
rethefatsa - make smooth; flatter; deceive by unfair promises.
rethetha - 1nT. < retha, make a noise like rain falling heavily; pound, as one boxing another.
rethethiwa - being pounded.
retile - has given a surname to; has nicknamed.
retilwe - has been praised; has been given a surname.
retisa - help to praise, or to sing the praises of.
retisitse - has helped to praise.
retisiwa - being caused to praise; being caused to pet.
retiwa - being praised; being petted.
reto - INTER, of turning round instantly.
retologa - turn round; turn towards.
retologêla - turn to; turn for.
retologetse - has turned to.
retologile - has turned; has turned towards.
retolola - turn around.
retolotsê - has turned around.
rêtwa - (same as "retiwa").
rêwa - being referred to; being meant; being spoken to. rialo per F. dira + jalo, do so; say So. riana DER F. dira + jaana, do thus; say thus.
ribama - similar to patsama, descend, or swoop down in a slanting direction; lie face downward.
ribamêla - lie face down, as a man or woman whose marriage partner has died.
ribametse - has lain face down for.
ribamisa - cause to lie face downward.
ribamisitse - has caused to lie face downward.
ribamisiwa - being caused to lie face downward.
ribaribedisa - cause to stoop now and again, as when avoiding a missile.
ribaribedisitse - has caused to stoop now and again, as when avoiding a missile.
ribaribediwa - being caused to stoop now and again.
ribaribêla - stoop, or bend to one side repetitively, as when avoiding a missile.
ribaribêlwa - being stooped or bent sideways repetitively, as when avoiding missiles.
ribê - instant bending to one side, as when avoiding a missile.
ribêga - turn a pot, etc. upside down.
ribegeditse - has turned a pot etc., upside down.
ribegediwa - being covered in, or over, as by a falling wall.
ribêgêla - turn a pot, etc., for, upside down.
ribegetsa - êga, cover in, or over, as one over whom a wall collapses.
ribegetse - has turned a pot etc., upside down, for.
ribegile - has placed a thing so as to cover another thing with it.
ribegilwe - has been turned, as a pot, etc., upside down.
ribegisa - help, or cause to turn a pot, etc., upside down.
ribegiwa - (same as "ribêgwa being turned upside down as a pot"), plate, ete.
ribêgwa - (same as "ribegiwa").
ribêla - avoid a missile by stooping, or moving aside; doze; become sleepy.
ribêtê - rivet [borrowed].
ribi - s, tasteless; without flavour; without any aroma.
ribo - of carving mounds of earth with a spade, or hoe.
ribola - beat with one severe blow; conquer with a single word.
ribologa - roll up and down, as eyes that are dim; be turned over, as a stone.
ribologêla - turn over for, as_ a large rock; roll up and down, as eyes for.
ribologile - have rolled up anq down, as eyes that are dim, or shortsighted. has turned over, as a large rock. y.
ribotsê - has beaten with one severe blow. rifi_N. CL. 9N-, SING. OF dirifi [borrowed], reef; heavy boots.
rikitlhwê - 14¢, a blunt knife, axe or any other cutting instrument.
rile - as in e rile, once upon a time; when.
rile - has said.
ripi - Striking down, or mowing down. ripitla DER F. pi, to crush, or mow down.
riripa - take all there is to take; gather everything up; cut all the hair off a head.
riripile - has taken all there was to take.
ririsatau - species of long grass with a flower like a lion's mane.
rita - stir up well-cooked meat, porridge etc., with a pronged stick; crawl, as an adult who is crippled.
ritêla - beat into a liquid, milk plus thick porridge, etc.; crawl towards, as an adult who is crippled; smoothen wet clay, used for plastering the floor, or wall.
ritibadisitse - has made still or quiet, as waves; has made contented.
ritibaditswe - has been made still, or quiet, as waves.
ritibala - be permanent; be a fixture; sit still and quiet; be calm, as wind; be contented.
ritibatsa - make calm; lessen pain and aches; make still, or quiet; tranquillise.
ritibatsa - (same as "ritibala").
ritibetse - has become calm ete.
ritidia - make bare.
ritintsha - (same as "rutuntsha teach").
ritisa - cause or help to crawl, as an adult who is crippled.
ritisitse - has helped to beat into a liquid; has helped to crawl. ritisitswe V-S.PASS. < ritisitse, has been helped to beat into a liquid.
ritisiwa - being helped to beat into a liquid. ' ritiwa V-S. PASS. Same as ritwa, being stirred up, as well-boiled meat, porridge with milk, etc., with a pronged stick.
ritla - as a dying thing.
ritlile - as an animal that is dying.
ritwa - (same as "/iflwa"),.:.
roba_ - break crosswise; break off, as heads of corn; reap. 1D. ExPR, go rêba sogo, take a rest; also go rêba maoto, rest for a while, as travellers.
roba sogo 1D - PHR, take a rest; stop hurrying.
robaditse - has put to sleep; has caused to sleep.
robaditswe - has been put to sleep; has been caused to sleep.
robadiwa - (same as "robatswa being put to sleep"),; being made to lie down; being lain down.
robagantsê - has broken entirely.
robagantswê - has been broken entirely.
rêbaganya - break entirely; smash up.
robaganye - is broken entirely.
rêbala - lie down to sleep; take a siesta; go to sleep.
rêbalana - has sexual intercourse.
rêbalanye - have had sexual intercourse.
rêbalêga - inducing sleep; cosy and relaxing environment.
robalegile - has had a good sleep.
rêbalêla - sleep at, as at a wake.
rêbalêlwa - being slept for.
robaroba - (same as "tobatoba"), go hither and thither in search of food, a nesting place, etc. rêbarêba _v.s. REP. break into pieces, smithereens, etc.
robarêbêga - be broken into pieces under pressure.
robarobêga - to go hither and thither in search of food.
robarobegile - has gone etc.; has broken into pieces.
robatsa - put to sleep; cause to sleep; lay down in a sleeping position; bid goodnight; anaesthetise. robêga_v.s. eur, become broken; be broken.
robegeditse - has caused to; have extracted only part of a thorn, tooth, etc., from a body.
robegeditswe - has been extracted, as a tooth whose splinters remain in the flesh.
rêbêgêla - êga, become broken off as a tooth, or a cork in a bottle; break for, or at.
robegetsa - cause to extract only part of a thorn, tooth, etc.
robegetse - has become broken off, as a tooth, or cork from a bottle; has become broken for, or at.
robegetswe - has been broken off, as a tooth, or cork in a bottle; has been broken for, or at.
robesetsa - cause to break off as a tooth, etc., while being extracted.
robetse - has lain down to sleep; has slept; has gone to sleep; be asleep.
robetswe - are asleep, of people.
robile - has broken off; has reaped.
robisa - cause or help to break; cause or help to reap.
robisitse - has helped to break; has helped to harvest.
robisitswe - has been helped to break; has been helped to harvest.
robisiwa - being helped to break; being helped to harvest.
robiwa - being harvested.
robokêga - die in large numbers.
robokegile - have died in large numbers.
robu - EXPR, Same as ruthu, of beating, or striking hard with a stick.
robula - beat, or strike hard with a Stick, as boys do to a donkey.
robutsê - has struck a thing hard with a stick.
roga - curse; insult; peer at one's private parts; witness and announce the appearance of the new moon.
rogaka - curse and insult a lot.
rogakêla - insult much, for; insult, or curse another's relations a lot.
rogakile - has insulted a lot.
rogakilwe - has been much insulted.
rogakiwa - (same as "rogakwa being cursed or insulted a lot").
rogakwa - (same as "rogakiwa").
rogana - be vulgar. rogêga_v.s.NEUT., capable of being insulted.
rogêla - insult the blood relation of.
rogile - has insulted.
rogilwe - has been insulted:.
rogisa - cause, or help to insult.
rogisitse - has caused or helped to insult.:.
rogisiwa - being caused or helped to insult. is.
rogiwa - being insulted; also used of the new moon when it appears or is seen for the first time; a rash.
rêjwa_v.s. PASS - (same as "robiwa"), being broken.
roka - Sew; suture.
rokagana - be intertwined; be enmeshed; be at one with; be sewn together.
rokagantsê - has entangled; has sewn together.
rokagantswê - has been enmeshed.
rokaganya - cause to be intertwined; enmeshed, or entangled; cause to sew together.
rokaganye - has become sewn together.
rokaganyeditse - has sewn together for.
rokaganyeditswe - has been sewn together for.
rokaganyediwa - being sewn together for.
rokaganyetsa - sew together for.
rokêga - well sewn; be incapacitated.
rokegile - has been well sewn.
rokêlêla - sew on to.
rokeletse - has sewn on to.
rokênrolo - 9-, [borrowed].
rokêtê - 9¢-, rocket [borrowed].
roketse - has sewn for.
rokgonyêga - move, shake, as a sleeper under a blanket.
rokgonyegile - turned, or twisted, as a sleeper under a blanket.
rokile - has sewn.
rokisa - cause or help to sew.
rokisitse - has caused or helped to sew.
rokisitswe - has been caused or helped to sew.
rokisiwa - (same as "rokiswa being caused or helped to sew").
rokiwa - (same as "rokwa"), being sewn.
rokoditse - similar to amule has sucked, as a calf.
rokoga - have urticaria.
rokologa - become unsewn: come out in a rash.:.
rokolola - wash dried pus from eyes; unstitch; undo a stitch; reopen a closed-up sore, or abscess.
rokololêla - unstitch for; undo a stitch for.
rokololetse - has undone stitches for.
rokololetswe - has been unstitched for.
rokomologa - break out in a rash; have a rash; have urticaria.
rokomologêla - has broken out in a rash for, on; has become scabby for.
rokomologetse - has broken out in a rash.
rokomologile - has broken out in a rash; has had a rash; has had urticaria; has become scabby.
rokomolotsêga - come out in a rash.
rokotsa - suck, said of a calf. rokwa ADjJ.s., dark brown, nearchocolate in colour.
rola - take something off the head, or feet. rola mafoko 1D. ExeR., give a report; report a matter.
rolotsê - has taken forcible possession of. Rôêma N.CL.14¢, SING. [borrowed], Catholic Church; Roman Catholic Church.
rêma - oralise; spoil a child through lack of discipline; infect evilly, or cause evil in another [pj.
roma - send.
romaka - send; be in the habit of sending others.
romana - send each other.
romêga - be willing to be sent; be capable of carrying out instructions when sent; be obedient; be confounded; be helpless from confusion.
romegile - has carried out instructions when sent.
romêla - send to; mail.
romêlwa - being sent to; being mailed.
rometse - has sent to; has mailed. rometswe v.'s. PASS. < rometse, has been sent, mailed, etc.
romile - has sent. romiwa V. Ss. PASS. Same as rongwa, being sent.
romola - make a mistake; give a drink to someone; cause a span of oxen to turn round.
romolola - make an oblation, or peace offering; remove a difficulty.
romolotsê - has made an oblation, or peace offering.
romotsê - has made a mistake; has given a drink to someone; has made a span of oxen turn round.
rona - fit badly; be unsuitable to; be unbecoming for; be objectionable; act objectionably.
rongwa - (same as "romiwa"), being sent.
ronkga - rub off, or pull off the scab of a sore; exacerbate a wound.
ronkgaka - over-exacerbate.
ronkgana - hurt each other in places that are already sore.
ronkgêga - have a wound exacerbated.
ronkgêla - hurt someone where it is sore or where there is a sore; rub off, or pull off the scab of another's sore.
ronkgetse - has rubbed, or knocked against and so hurt a sore place.
ronkgile - has hurt again, where it is already sore.
ronkgilwe - has been rubbed off, or pulled off, as the scab of a sore.
ronkgisa - cause to be hurt again, as a sore, or a sore place.
ronkgisitse - has caused the scab of a sore to be rubbed off, with resultant pain.
ronkgisiwa - being caused to inflict renewed pain on a wound; hurt a place already sore.
ronkgiwa - (same as "ronkgwa"), being hurt on a sore place; being rubbed off as the scab of a sore.
ronoka - walk proudly.
ronokile - has strutted; has walked proudly.
rênêpa - glean. Tonopese N. CL. 9¢-, SING. [borrowed], rinderpest.
ronopile - has gleaned.
rontsha - maliciously cause a thing to be unsuited for a purpose.
rontshana - refuse, for no apparent reason, to give or sell to one another, that which one afterwards sells, or gives to another, or just wastes. Tona v.s.simp.,be unbecoming, unsuitable; be illfitted.
rontsha - make to be ill-fitting.
rontshitse - has refused, for no apparent reason, to give or sell, etc.
rontshiwa - being refused the opportunity to buy or possess, that which is later sold or given to another individual, or just wasted.
ropama - be very large; be immense hence very conspicuous.
ropame - is very large; has become immense; has become very large.
ropefala - become a ruin.
ropefatsa - ruin entirely; cause to become a ruin; make into a ruin; destroy utterly.
ropefetse - has become a ruin.
rophisa - similar to kotlopisa, draw water gradually from a weak fountain.
rophisitse - has drawn water gradually from a weak fountain. TOpO PRIM. INTER, Same as roto, of appearing instantly, or instantaneously.
ropoga - appear in a hard lump; stand out clearly; be noticeable.
roposa - rip up; disembowel; cut down the stomach of a dead animal.
ropositse - has ripped up, etc.
rêra_ - (same as "Ona"), roar; snore; moan.
rora - (same as "thotha"), remove, carry away in lots; garner in corn, etc.
rorêga - be carried away, as loads of corn.
roregile - has become carried away, as loads of corn.
rêrêla - roar for; snore for.
rorêla - carry away for; gather to, or into.
rêretse - has snored, or roared for.
roretse - has carried away for.
rêrile - has removed, or carried away.
rorile - has snored, or roared.
rorisa - praise.
rêrisitse - has caused to snore.
rorisitse - has helped to remove.
rorisitse - has praised.
rêrisiwa - being caused or helped to carry things away.
rorisiwa - being caused or helped to snore.
rorisiwa - being praised.
roriwa - (same as "rorwa"), being removed or carried away.
rorobantsê - has made lazy; has spoiled a young person.
rorobanya - make lazy, or spoil, a child that is badly brought up.
roroeletsa - see Sošueletsa, incite to.
roroma - take from another spitefully; tremble with fear; shiver, as in a fever.
rêrêmêla - (same as "tdtêmêla"), sink into mud; go into detail.
rêrêmetse - (same as "totêmetse"), has sunk into mud.
roromisa - cause to tremble.
roromisitse - has caused to tremble.
roromisiwa - being caused to tremble.
roromiwa - (same as "rorongwa"), being shaken.
roronywa - be feared.
rorwa - being removed or carried away, in lots.
rosalala - sit still and do nothing.
rosi QUANT. OF - 2ND PERS., we only; we alone.
rota - micturate; urinate; pass water; to pass water in bed.
rotane - cane; walking stick [borrowed].
rotêla - or into.
rotetse - has urinated at, or into.
rotha - drip, as liquid; rain in occasional large drops; dribble.
rothalala - 1nr., rain in a thick pouring stream.
rothaletse - has rained ina thick pouring stream.
rotheditswe - drops have been caused to drip into.
rothediwa - being made to drip into something, as drops.
rothetsa - cause drops to drip into.
rothetse - has dripped into.
rothotha - sting simultaneously; bite or sting often or a great deal.
rothothêla - or shoot at simultaneously.
rothothetse - has bitten, or stung a lot for; has stabbed, or shot simultaneously for.
rothothetswe - has been bitten, or stung a great deal.
rothothile - has stabbed, shot, or stung simultaneously.
rothothilwe - has been stabbed, shot, stung, bitten simultaneously.
rothothwa - (same as "rothothiwa"), being stabbed, shot, or stung simultaneously.
rothwe - 1A¢-, same as rotho a wild spinach used as a vegetable; species of eomoe gynandra.
rotisa - induce to urinate.
rotisitse - has caused, or helped or induced, to urinate.
rotisitswe - has been caused or helped, or induced, to urinate.
rotisiwa - being caused to urinate.
rotiwa - being urinated. rotlhe QUAT. USED WITH SUBST. AND IN PARTICULAR THE ABST. PROV.,rond, all of us.
rotloetsa - encourage.
roto - (same as "robo"), of appearing, or emerging instantly.
rotêba - walk cheekily, as a baboon.
rotobala - similar to papamala, be exposed; be clearly seen.
rotobetse - has walked cheekily.
rotobile - has walked cheekily.
rotobisa - cause to walk cheekily.
rotobisiwa - being caused to walk with cheek and pomp.
rotobiwa - as a bully baboon.
rotoga - be large and projecting; be in view; emerge.
rotogêla - be in view for; emerge for.
rotogile - has moved back, away or to the side.
rotogile - has emerged; has popped out, as eyes.
rotola - raise and fix the eyes; look eagerly.
rotolêla - raise and fix the eyes at; look eagerly at.
rotoletse - has raised and fixed the eyes at.
rototsê - has raised and fixed the eyes; has looked eagerly.
rotsê - has taken something off the head, or feet.
rêtwê - a big male baboon, that is likely to be one of the leaders of a troop. ITa@ N.sir; father, used in addressing, or invoking a person or thing.
rraab6 - ¢, and bdênê, their father.
rraagwê - + gagwê, his/her father.
rraagwêmogolo - 14¢-, borraagwêmogolo, gagwê mogolo, his/her grandfather.
rraagwêmogologolwane - 1Ae-, his great grandfather.
rragomogolo - 14¢, + gago and mogolo, his/her grandfather; your grandfather.
rralebaka - 14¢, baker.
rramên6 - dentist.
rramogolo - + mogolo, my grandfather; father's elder brother, uncle.
rrê - my father, used in speaking about him, or in reference to one's father.
rrêmogolo - 1A¢-, mogolo, my grandfather; my father's elder brother.
rua - ess; inherit; own.
ruana - ess each other.
ruantsê - has led toa reconciliation of two parties; has created a friendship between two parties by giving each other a present.
ruantswê - have been reconciled by a mutual presentation of presents. ruanya v.Ss.CAUS. < ruana, bring together in friendship those estranged.
ruanye - have given presents mutually (used of those who were strangers to each other).
rudile - has revived; has come to after a faint.
rudilwe - has been revived; has come to after a faint.
rudisa - restore to life, or animation; give life to the dead.
rudisitse - has restored to life; has given life to the dead.
rudisitswe - has been restored to life; has been caused to revive.
rudisiwa - being restored to life; being caused to revive.
ruêga - êla v.s. APPL. possess for. Tuêlwa v.s. pass, being possessed for. Tuetse v.s.prr. < ruêla, has possessed for. Tuetswe v.s.pass. < ruetse, is possessed for; has been possessed for.
rufa - pay a hired person for work done in the garden.
rufile - has paid a person for garden work.
ruile - has possessed; possess.
ruiwa - is inherited, possessed, or owned by; being inherited, possessed, or owned.
rukutlha - rebel; brawl]; riot.
rukutlhêga - become rebellious, or riotous.
rukutlhêla - rebel for, or against.
rukutlhetse - has rebelled for, or against.
rukutlhetswe - has been rebelled against.
rukutlhisa - cause or help to rebel.
rukutlhisitse - has caused or helped to rebel.
rukutlhisiwa - being caused or helped to rebel.
rula - (same as "rulwa"), come to, after a faint, revive.
ruladisa - cause to turn away; face away.
ruladisitse - has caused to turn or face away.
rulagana - be in order; go in order; follow each other in order.
rulagantsê - has set in order.
rulagantswê - have been set in order.
rulaganya - set in order.
rulaganye - is in order; be placed in order; have followed each other in order.
rulaganyolola - put out of order; make disorderly; rearrange.
rulaganyolotsê - has made disorderly.
rulara_ - a ruler [borrowed].
rulara - (same as "fulara"), which is more commonly used; turn away the face; turn back.
rulêla - bring to life for; revive for.
rulêla - thatch.
rulêlêga - be thatched well; become well thatched; be well thatched.
rulelegile - is well thatched; has become well thatched.
rulelêla - thatch for.
ruletse - has brought to life for.
ruletse - has thatched.
ruletswe - has been thatched.
rulwa - (same as "rula"), revive; come to after a faint; also v.s. pass. being revived, etc.
ruma - devour (of beasts of prey).
rumaruma - smile without showing teeth.
rumotswê - has been provoked, or vexed. '.
rumula - provoke; spite.
rumulaka - provoke many times.
rumulana - be very provocative; vex each other.
rumulegile - has become provoked.
rumulwa - being provoked, or vexed.
rumutsê - has provoked, or vexed.
runa - search for and then kill, as lice; search for and kill by crushing between thumbnails, as is done with lice; inquire carefully into a matter..ExPR, runa molomo, erupt, as a molehill.
runana - 's hair.
runêla - 's head.
runetse - has destroyed headlice from.
runiwa - being searched for and then killed, as lice; being searched for and killed by crushing between thumbnails, as is done with lice.
runnê - has killed vermin between thumbnails; is stout, or portly.
runngwa - be lifted up, or raised; has been lifted or raised.
runtsê - has erupted, as a molehill; to have grown overnight, as a mushroom.
runwa - (same as "runiwa").
runya - lift up, or raise, as a mole earth or a person a box to his shoulder.
ruolola - disinherit; dispossess.
ruolotsê - has disinherited, or dispossessed.
rupa - go through initiation or puberty ceremonies; be initiated into; dance dances of the puberty ceremonies.
rupisa - circumcise; cause to pass through the puberty rites.
rupisitse - has circumcised.
rupisiwa - being circumcised.
rupiwa - undergoing initiation, or circumcision.
rura - similar to fofa, fly, as a flock of birds.
rurêla - mix medicine.
ruretse - has mixed medicines.
ruri - ADV. OF MAN, truly; verily; of a truth; really; surely; when it follows the applied form of the verb it has the significance of finality, or thoroughness, as in go tsamaêla ruri, to go away for good.
rurifaditse - has made true; has established.
rurifaditswe - has made true.
rurifala - become true.
rurifatsa - make true; establish.
rurifetse - has become true; has become established.
rurubadile - has flapped in the wind.
rurubaditse - has caused to blow about; has made to flap in the wind.
rurubaditse - has caused to swell up.
rurubaditswe - has been blown about; has been made to flap in the wind, as the garment of a runner, or loose sail of a boat; has been caused to swell up.
rurubala - as the garment of a runner, or loose sail of a boat; swell up.
rurubatsa - cause to swell up; cause to fly, or flap in the wind.
rurubetse - has swollen up; has flown, or flapped in the wind, as the garment of a runner, or loose sail of a boat.
ruruga - swell.
rurugêla - swell for, or to.
rurugile - be swollen; has swollen.
rurugiwa - (same as "rurugwa"), being swollen.
rurusa - (same as "rurutsha cause to swell").
rurusitse - has caused to swell.
rurusiwa - being caused to swell.
ruse - rust [borrowed].
rušwa_ - 99-, fee for awakening ("tsosa"') the bones (ditaola).
ruta - teach; instruct.
rutana - teach one another.
rutêga - become educated.
rutegile - has become educated.
rutêla - teach for, or to.
rutetse - has taught for.
rutha - blow strongly, as the wind; hit hard; strike with a stick.
ruthagana - fall hard and helplessly.
ruthaka - hit hard many times.
ruthana - strike each other with a stick.
ruthisa - help or cause to strike, or hit heavily.:.
ruthisitse - has caused to strike heavily.
ruthu - Expr, same as roby, of striking or hitting heavily.
rutifalêla - overshadow.
rutifaletse - has overshadowed; is overshadowed. rutla_v.s.simp., break down, or pull down; pull about; pull off, or tear to the ground; raze to the ground.
rutlaka - pull about a lot; raze many structures to the ground.
rutlana - pull each other about. rutlêga_v.s. NEUT, capable of being dragged; capable of being razed to the ground.
rutlêla - break down for; raze to the ground for.
rutliwa - (same as "rutlwa"), being broken down, or pulled down; being razed to the ground.
rutlola - disinherit; take away a child's possessions.
rutlologile - has become pulled down; has become dismantled, as a roof that is being repaired.
rutlolola - pull down, as a house.
rutlolotsê - has pulled down as a house.
rutlotsê - has disinherited.
rwadisitse - has caused or helped to carry.
rwadisiwa - being caused or helped to carry.
rwala - put on hat or shoes; put or carry something on the head, shoulder or back; put on the neck, as a yoke; bear.
rwaledisa - being caused or helped to collect firewood.
rwaledisitse - has caused or helped to collect firewood.
rwaledisitswe - has been caused or helped to collect firewood.
rwaledisiwa - being caused or helped to collect firewood.
rwalêga - capable of being carried; be portable; be carried.
rwalegile - has become portable; has been carried.
rwalêla - carry for; put something on the head, or feet for.
rwalêla - collect firewood.
rwalêlêga - capable of being collected as firewood; become collected, as firewood.
rwalelegile - has become collected, as firewood.
rwalêlêla - êla, collect firewood for.
rwalêlêsêga - become full often, become flooded often, as a river; be lifted up, as waves of the sea; be emotionally charged.
rwalelesegile - has become flooded often, as a river.
rwaleletse - has gathered firewood for.
rwaletse - has carried for. rwalwa vV.s.pass, same as rwadiwa, being carried.
rwantsê - has beaten with a light stroke.
rwanya - beat with a light stroke.
rwarwanyêga - scorch, or burn as food in a pot.
rwarwanyegile - has scorched, burnt, etc.
rwele - has put on headware, or shoes; has carried on the shoulder, the head or back.
rwelwe - has been placed on head, or feet; has been borne, or carried, on shoulder or back. Twesa v.s.caus. < rwala, help to put something on another's head or feet, shoulder or back. Twesitse v.s.pFr. < rwesa, has put something on another's head, or feet.
rwesitswe - has been put on another's head, etc. Twesiwa V.S.PASS. < rwesa, being helped to put something on the head or on the feet.
