sa - as darkness, night, clouds rain, etc. Same Poss. s.,same as sa ka, mine.
sa ntse - still continuing; still; yet, ke sa ntse ke bua, 1 am still speaking. Sa v.s.sIMP, name; give a name to. $a ADJ.s, new; novel; strange. Sa _v.s.simp., burn; scald; scorch; become burnt, scalded, or scorched.
saafa - s, extravagant. Saba v.s. simp, relish with; use a sauce.
sabata - sabbath. Sabêla v.s. app. relish with, or for. Sabile v.s. prr, has relished; has relished with. Sabisa v.s. caus, provide with relish. Sabisitse v.s. prt. < Sabisa, has provided with relish. Sabisitswe v.s. pass. < Sabisitse, has been provided for. Sabisiwa v.s. pass. < Sabisa, being provided with relish. Sabiwa v.s. PAss., Same as Sajwa, being relished with [borrowed].
sabole - a sword. Sadi PRIM. 1D. ExPR, of turning instantly, to look; an instant glance to the side. Sadia v.s. simp. cook insufficiently; wash badly; daze, as the sun; dazzle the sight. Sadiêga v.s. NEUT, glisten; become dazed by the sun; be badly cooked. Sadiegile v.s. rr. < Jadiêga, has glistened; has become dazed by the sun. Sadikantsê v.s. prr. < Sadikanya, has glanced this way and that; has flashed eyes in many directions; has made to glare. Sadikanya v.s. caus, glance this way and that; flash eyes all over; make to glare; flash, as the eye. Sadile v.s.prr. < Sala, has become insufficiently cooked [borrowed].
sadisa - cause to remain; reserve; keep back; leave; take leave of someone; bid farewell, as if to go away. Ssadiseditse v.s. prt. < sadisetsa, has left, or reserved some food, work, etc., for.
sadiseditswe - has been lef for; has been kept back, or reserved for.
sadisediwa - (same as "sadisetswa"), being left for.
sadisetsa - leave for; Teserve some food, work, etc., for; cause to Temain for. Sadisitse v.s.prr. < sadisa, has caused to remain, etc.; has left; has bidden farewell to.
sadisitswe - has been caused to remain; has been left; has been bidden farewell. sadisiwa _v.s. pass, same as sadiswa, being caused to remain; being left, as remnants of something; being bidden farewell.
saena - append signature; sign; enter into a marriage contract.
saenaka - sign a lot.
saenêga - be signed.
saenêla - sign for; witness for.
saenêlwa - being signed for. Ssaenetse v.s. PFT. < saenêla, has signed for, saenisa vV.s.CAUs., Same as saentsha, cause to sign; contract a marriage before a civil officer,'.
saenisitse - (same as "Saentshitse has made to sign").
saenisitswe - has been made to sign. Saenisiwa v.s.Pass. < saenisa, same as saentshiwa, being made to sign.
saeniwa - (same as "saenwa"), being signed.
saennê - has signed.
saennwê - has been signed.
saentsha - (same as "saenisa cause to sign").
saentshitse - (same as "Saenisitse"), has made to sign.
saentshiwa - (same as "Sanisiwa"), being caused to sign.
saesale - sisal.
saetebôrêtê - sideboard [borrowed].
safa - squander; lavish; give away foolishly. Safaditse v.s.prr. < Safatsa, has made new. Safala v.s. NEuT., become new.
safari - (For, safari suit. | Safatsa v.s.caus. < Safala, make new; renew. Safetse v.s.prr. < Safala, has become new, or renewed.
safile - has spent, squandered, lavished, or given away foolishly.: Saga N.CL.9N., SING. OF di§aga {FOR}, DIAL. VAR, 3agd, a saw. Saga_V.S.SIMP. [borrowed], DIAL. VAR, Saga, saw. Sagaka v.s.Exr,saw much; saw extensively. Sagana v.s. REC, hurt each other with a saw. Sagêga v.s. Eur, become sawn. gagêla_v.S. APPL. [borrowed], SAW, work with a saw for.
saidile - (same as "saitsê"), have sale moved along in large numbers.
saila - move along in large numbers, as a crowd of people, or a swarm of young locusts. " gaile N.CL.9N., SING. OF disaile {For}, Sail; canvas.
sakgadiwa - enrage etc.
sakhwe - a little bag, or satchel, worn by women.
sala - (same as "sale"), since; ever since.
sala - remain; remain behind when others go.
sala morago - follow behind, or after. sala sentlê 1. Expr, lit. means remain nicely; good-bye, spoken to the person remaining behind. Salabantsê v.s.prr. < Salabanya, has shouted or __ made a trumpet-like noise, etc. Salabanya v.s.DER F.shout or make trumpet-like noise; trumpet, as an elephant.
salalagana - /alaana and lekana, become destroyed; become smashed, or burst; fall asunder, or in pieces.
salalaganye - has become destroyed; has become smashed, or burst; has fallen asunder, or in pieces.
salapetere - saltpetre [borrowed].
salate - ¢, Same as morêgo; merêgê e e tlhakantsweng. N.N.,a saddle. v.s. aux, since; ever since, ke sale ke bona, v. S.SIMP., SAW ever SINCE; USED MOST TIMES WITH INVARIABLE SUBJ. < @ Sale, since; still; ever since [borrowed].
salê - express polite commands and the language that refers to direct commands; mo salê moragê, follow him (please), go after him (please).
salêla - become remnants; remain behind.
salêlwa - being left with; being gained, or profited.
salemone - disalemone, salmon. Salogantsê v.s.prr. < Saloganya, has passed quickly. Saloganya v.s. simp. pass swiftly [borrowed].
saloga - be poor-sighted. Salošalo N. cL. 1A-, SING. oF bosalošalo, a quickly passing thing; anything passing quickly and lightly.
salwa - being left behind.
sama - arrange a pillow; put under the head for a pillow; make a pillow of; follow doggedly.
samane - 1Ae-, a species of grey ground squirrel with whitish tail; a species of meercat.
sameditse - has put something under the head, as a pillow.
samêga - capable of being used as a pillow.
samegile - has become used as a pillow; has become a pillow.
samêla - cushion with or for.
samêntê - Same as semênte, cement; plaster of Paris [borrowed].
sametsa - (same as "samisa"), put something under the head as a pillow; cushion.
sametse - has placed a pillow for.
samorago - lit. afterbirth; placenta.
sampole - an example; a model; a lookalike. Sanšanyêga v.s. simp, return disappointed, having failed in a task; hiss, as fat burning in a pot; talk, or scold very angrily. Sanganyegile v.s. pri. < Janšanyêga, has returned, etc.; has failed in a task [borrowed].
santawana - 1A@-, N. and disantawana, same as thokolosi, an imaginary creature that is used in magic and witchcraft.
santlha - s, first; in the first place; before everything else.
santlhokwe - 14¢, N. and disantlhokwe, gall; the gall bladder; gall sickness, or anaplasmosis. Santse v.s. pri. < Sanya, has rained lightly; has drizzled; has spouted violently. Sanya v.s.sip., drizzle; fall lightly (rain); spout out violently, hence w. Expr, gaeneea Sanyasanya. Sanyašanya v.s. REP. raining intermittently; rain, as it falls and ceases for a while. Sapa v.s.simp., beat; swim. Sapaka v.s. ext. beat a lot; swim a lot. Sapana v.s. REC, beat one another. Sapêga v.s.NeuT. be thoroughly beaten. Sapegile v.s.prt. < Sapêga, is/was beaten thoroughly; became beaten. Sapile v.s. rrr, has beaten; has swum. Sapisa v.s. caus, cause or help to beat; cause to swim. Sapisitse v.sprr. < Sapisa, has caused to be beaten; has helped or caused to swim. Sapisitswe v.s. pass. < Sapisitse, has been made or helped to be beaten; has been caused to swim. Sapisiwa v.s. pass. < Sapisa, being caused to be beaten; being made to swim. Sapiwa v.s. Pass, same as Satswa, being beaten; being swum.
sapêlanaga - a species of plant, used as a cure for diseases. Sarasara V.Ss.REP.,to rain, in a drizzle.
saretintshi - 99, ING. oF disaretintshi sardine. Sari N..,(FoR, (seaparê sa Seintiya), sari [borrowed].
satalaete - satellite [borrowed].
satene - ¢, satin. Satswa v.s.pass. < Sapa, same as Sapiwa, being beaten; being swum. Saušawane N. ¢, N. and dixausawane, a viper; an adder. Sawašawane same as Sausawane. Sawara N., shower. S€ N. PREF. SING., USED WITH NS. THAT TAKE THE. PREF. IN THE € OC REFERS TO NS., PRONS. AND QUALIFICATIVES OF 7re a se bêna, we see it. S€ 1ST AND 2ND ELEMENT OF NON V. PRED. CONC, selêpê se sentlê, the axe is beautiful. S€ PREFIXED TO AN. GIVES THE IDEA OF LIKENESS TO; EQUIVALENT OF SUFFIX "ISH" IN ENGLISH, kolobê, a pig, seka kolobê, piggish, similar to seka. Se v.S.AUx., not, expresses the as in e ne e se kgomo, it was not a cow. S€ SC (SHORT FORM) OCCURS WITH NS., PRONS. AND QUAI. OF.,7ê a se rêma sentlê, the axe chops well; sdnê se rêma sentlê, it chops well. S€ NEG. FORM. NOT.,SaME aS DIAL. VAR, $a go se rate, not to like. S€ 1ST AND 2ND ELEMENT OF ADJ. CONC., Selêpê se setona, the big axe; 1sT AND 2ND ELEMENT oF REL. conc, selêpê se se remang, the axe that is chopping; ENUM, conc. for the stems sele, -fe, -pê, -ngwe, as in selêpê se sele, some other axe, or a certain grass. Note the constructions sefe le sefe, sengwe le Sengwe, mean any, or all regardless of type; syL. or THE FOLLOWING: DEM. OF 1ST Pos., selêpê seno, this axe nearer Me; DEM. OF 3RD Pos, selêpê sele, that axe over there; DEM. OF 2ND Pos, selêpê Se, this axe near us.; S€ A SUBJ. CONC. (LONG FORM), Selepe se a rêma, the axes chop [borrowed].
se na - V.PHR, not having; the opposite of ng le, as in o ne o se na madi, you did not have money.
se sele - s, used with Ns. cL. se-, see tab. p xviii, some other; a different one.
seabê - a portion given.
seabêl6 - an offering.
seabê - a hole dug in searching for a jackal. Seaga N.DER. < aga, a dweller.
seagêla-molapong coMpP - a sand martin.
seaka - (same as "sekakalepa"), of lebêlêtê, a harlot; a prostitute.
seakany6 - (same as "kakanyê"), which is more commonly used, a reasoning; a studying.
seak6 - N.-,diakê, an ear of corn; the first or principal ear of corn, or maize cob.
seala - flesh of foreleg of animal.
sealêl6 - sticks put at the bottom of a pot; well, etc.; a foundation layer.
seal6 - similar to phatê, a skin, etc., spread out for lying on; a sleeping mat.
sealogane - an initiate; a graduant, formerly of an initiation Tite.
seamoganyi - insulator.
seamusi - mammal.
seane - a proverb; a wise saying; an adage; a byword.
seanê -:SING: OF diand, same as serêtê, a totem; an object of veneration.
seantlo \ - lit. one who goes to a house; a woman who has been taken to wife by the younger brother of her deceased husband.
seanyi - a suckling.
seaparê - | an article of othing; a dress; a shirt, etc.; menstrual period.
seapu - a glutton; a low fellow.
searamê - an unfortunate fellow; a sufferer; the part under the roof where it lies, or rests on the wall [borrowed].
searolê - quotient.
seati - one who stays at home; one who does not take journeys.
seatla - a hand; an assistant.
seatla-sa-kgosi COMP - a chief's helper, or assistant.
sêba - backbite; whisper evil of; speak evil against. %êba v.s. simp. same as /eba, look around; look over the shoulder; look back.
sebaa - (same as "pada"), a small bare place on the ground.
sebabatsane - aspecies of stinging plant, with hairy leaves; a species of nettle.
sebabetsane - (same as "sebabatsane").
sebabi - an itch; scurvy; scabies.
sebabê - an itch.
sebaga - a bead; a string of beads; a necklace.
sebaka - and dipaka distance; space; the firmament; a chance; an opportunity. sebakeng apv. oF PLA, fail to be of any use. USED INID. ExPR, ke kgosi sebakeng, I am an independent chief.
sebala - complexion; cataract; a blemish.
sebalafatsi - paint; dye.
sebalamakgolo - (same as "khomputara"), computer.
sebalammolokwane - 1A¢-, a tiger cat.
sêbana - backbite each other. Sêbana v.s. REC, glance at each other.
sêbane - have backbitten each other.
sebanjolo - DIAL. VAR serankure, sebantolo and segaba, a Setswana fiddle.
sebanka - (same as "banka"), a piece of ground missed by the plough, or the hoe.
sebantšolo - DIAL vaR. < serankure, sebanjolo, a Setswate fiddle.
sebanyoro - DIAL. var, sebantsolo, serankure, or segaba, fiddle.
sebapalê - an edible wild fruit. Sêbašêba v.s. REP. look round first on one side and then on the other; look from side to side; look about, as one who is terrified.
sebata - a patch; a strip; a white spot; sebata sa lefatshe, N.PuR,a strip of land; a field.
sebataladi - a person who crouches; one lying flat on the ground; an eavesdropper, hence the prov., sekukuni se bonwa ke sebataladi.
sebatana - a beast of prey; a ravenous beast; a cheat.
sebatêg6 - a wall surface that has just been plastered with ay; ay for plastering purposes.
sebatla - an open valley, or a treeless place, or plain; an open space in the veld, or a level place, hence a spot that is suitable for holding unregulated meetings; a kind of Hyde Park Corner.
sebatê - a chip on an enamel vessel.
sebe - a sin.
sebeba - a Sore under the toes; a blister between toes.
sebedi - < pedi, twos used mainly as an apv.s,as in ka sebedi, in two parts; pair; with both hands.
sebedis6 - leaven; yeast.
sebeditse - has whispered to; has given a hint to.
sebeditswe - has been whispered to.
sebediwa - being whispered to; being given a hint of.
sebêêla - an object strategically used to cause some harm by superstitious means; a parcel containing witchcraft potions left in some place.
sebêêlêla - a pledge; a thing placed under something else, as a cushion, similar to mosamo.
sebêêlêl6 - a pledge; a thing placed under something else, as a cushion, shelf.
sebeeletso - a pledge; something placed under another to cushion; a pillion.
sebêêl6 - a pledge.
sebegO - a waif; that which is traditionally given to the eldest member of a community after it has been found but not aimed; any precious game killed and given to the eldest member of a community, in accordance with tradition.
sebeka - a portion; a slice.
sebekedi - similar to sebêtlêla, a flying chip, or splinter.
sêbêla - whisper to; give a hint to.
sebelebejane - a disadvantage, prov.,bontlê bo na le dibelebejane.
sebele - personality; reality; a person himself; bodily form.
sebelesebele - as in expression ke a mo itse sebelesebele, I know his every feature; I know him thoroughly.
sebenya - jewel.
sebê6 - anything on which to place something.
sebesetso - a rainmaker's hearth.
sebeso - a cooking place; a grate; a gridiron; a rainmaker's fireplace; an altar.
sebetapoane - a superior kind of necklace.
sebetebete - a species of ground creeping plant, with large yellow flowers.
sebete - a liver. 1D. ExPR o sebete, you are brave; itoris; Cassia obovata.
sebete sa lonao - the sole of the foot. Sebetla v.s. sip, cut, or chop up a melon, or similar thing. Sebetlaka v.s.exr, cut, or chop up into irregular pieces, a melon, or something similar. Sêbetlêga v.s.neur, capable of being chopped up, like a melon; have sharp cutting pains. Sebetlegile v.s.prr. < sêbêtlêga, has had sharp cutting pains.
sebêtlêla - (same as "sebekedi"), a block on which to adze; a chip made when adzing; a scrap of meat made when chopping meat; a chopping block. Sêbetlêla v.s. aPpL.,cut up a melon, etc., for chopping; a chopping block. Sêbêtlêlêla v.s.inr, cut up a melon, etc., into very small pieces. Sebetlile v.s. rrr, has chopped up a melon, pumpkin, etc. Sebetlisa v.s. caus, cause or help to chop up a melon, pumpkin, etc., up. Sebetlisitse v.s.prr. < Sebetlisa, has caused to chop up a melon, tuber, etc. Sebetlisiwa v.s.pass. < Sebetlisa, being helped to chop up a melon, tuber, etc. Sebetliwa v.s. pass, being chopped up, as a melon, ete.
sebeto - a cross person; a cross, or peevish child.
sebetsa - a dangerous weapon; any instrument of punishment. sebetsa_v.s. appL., whisper to; give a hint to.
sebetsana - whisper to one another; give a hint to each other.
sebetsane - a thick bead necklace, or neck ring.
sebetsantsê - have whispered, or murmured, or informed each other.
sebetsanya - whisper, or murmur to each other.
sebetsêga - responsive to whisper.
sebetsegile - was responsive to whispered information; has acted on whispered information.
sebets6 - (same as "sebetsa"), which is more commonly used, a Scourge; an instrument used for punishing.
sebibi - similar to sefifi, a place where an animal has died, or been killed; a carcase.
sebile - has spread evil rumour of. Sebile v.s. prr, has looked around; has looked back.
sebilê - a kind of black lead used for mixing with fat for smearing on the head of women, or girls. 1p. ExPR, mmala o sebilê, pure black. Sebine N. N., shebeen [borrowed].
sebini - siING. oF dibini, an expert dancer; a famous dancer.
sebipedi - the bone of the "ditaol6", representing the doctor.
sebip6 - similar to sekhurumêl6, a covering; a veil.
sebitl6 - probably same as sebutlê and legarejane, a wrist.
seboa - a threshing floor traditionally fenced separately from the homestead.
seboana - with which it is interchangeably used.
seboba - a gad fly; a dung fly; a large venomous insect. PRov., seboba re bata sa mokwatla, sa mpa re a mpampetsa.
sebodu - decay; rottenness; corruption; slimy matter oozing from putrid meat. 1p. Expr, a lazy person. prov. sebodu se lekwa ka legano, sa nkê se latsa le tlala.
sebof6 - a band; a binder.
seboga - used interchangeably with sebogêla, turn back the head after looking round; turn away from; become wary of impending danger.
sebogile - has become wary of impending danger.
seboka - congress; group of people gathered for a specific purpose.
sebokolodi - a millipede.
seboko - a worm; a maggot; a caterpillar.
sebdk6 - a sign, or standard; a praise name; the totem of a tribe.
sebokosei - silkworm.
sebokwana - small worm.
sebola - a white round spot on a domestic animal; a fault; abscess.
sebolai - a killer; a creature that kills.
sebolaê - an instrument for killing; a weapon.
sebolaya-bana COMP - commonly known as seja-bana and sekgono and sankatle, an elbow.
seboleledi - a mechanical device for recording speed.
sebonesanawa - and nawa, bean; a glow worm.
seboni - similar to mmoni, same as fensetere, that which sees; a window.
sebono - an anus.
sebônê - a vision; a thing seen, commonly referred to as pond.
sebopêlê - (same as "popêlê"), a woman's womb.
sebopi - (same as "seboa"), a threshing floor; a plastered backyard floor, same as sebubi sa pholêlê.
sebopiwa - a created thing; a creature.
sebote - Mirafra sabota; a species of bird.
sebotha - a species of hill grass, used for nests by small wild animals.
sebothêl6 - a resting place for cattle, etc.
sebotho - an enclosed sleeping place for cattle.
sebube - porridge made with thick milk; anything with cobwebs on it.
sebubi sa pholêl6 comPpL - < Sê-, tsa pholêlê, a plastered backyard floor for threshing corn.
sebudubudu - (same as "seburuburu"), a whirling toy.
sebudulêlê - dibudulêlê balloon.
sebui - (babui), orator; speaker.
sebula - anything that opens; a key, the borrowed word 'khii' is preferred.
sebulamabêtlôl6 - bottle opener.
sebulammolopita - can opener.
seburuburu - a whirling toy; anything whirled to keep.
sebutlê - a dimunitive hare; a dwarf hare.
sebutl6 - (same as "legwejana and sebitl6"),; a wrist.
sediba - a well; previously, a natural hole where people can get water.
sedibana - a little well. prov., sedibana se pele ga se ikanngwe.
sedibeletso - hand vessel placed to catch dripping liquid in.
sedibêlôê - pot; water jug, receptacle, etc.
sedibê - a patch.
sedibu - a rcle.
sedidi - giddiness; dizziness; vertigo.
sedifaditse - has lit; has made bright.
sedifala - become light; be light.
sedifatsa - lighten; make lighter.
sedifetse - has lit; has clarified.
sedikadike - a million, rcular.
sedikadiki - (same as "sedikwadikwe rcular"),; round, as a hut; measureless; numberless, as of cattle. Sedikisi N.didikisi, radius.
sedik6 - a rcle.
sedikolosê - didikolosê; any revolving thing; a turntable.
sedikwadiki - (same as "sedikadiki rcular in shape"),; measureless in extent; numberless.
sedila - massage; shampoo; rub hard, or press hard, as in anointing a sick person.
sedilêga - be smoothed; recover from sickness.
sedile - (same as "setse"), has picked up one by one.
sedimo - a ghost; an invisible thing that can be heard; a place where flesh, partly eaten by dogs, or killed by them, is cooked.
sedimogo - a chance. Sedimonthole n. cu. 14¢-, the month of December.
sediri - and madiri, same as Setiri, a tool; an instrument; the subject of a sentence.
sedirisê - appliance.
sedirwa - ect of a sentence.
sedisa - investigate. Sseditse N.cL.7 se-, sING. oF diditse, a whisk made of the hair of the tail or mane of horse, giraffe, etc. ip. ExPR, tsaya seditse, let you take the whisk, i.e. I acknowledge defeat in an argument.
seduledi - a siege; an investment of a town; a surrounding.
sedulêlê - settee.
sedul6 - (same as "setild"), a seat.
sedumedi - thunder in a oudless sky, and without lightning; a meteor, falling with a noise; an uproar, or tumult.
sedupapula - erodendrum ternatum; a species of woody plant.
sedupi - a diviner; a water finder.
seebana - (same as "leebana"), fits of an insane person; epilepsy.
seedi - giddiness.
seefadu - a Shout, or yell, made to cause a fright.
seêga - lean (a thing) against; stand (something) against a support.
seegile - (a thing) against a support.
seeleele - (same as "sehepheula"), a fool; a foolish person.
seêlê - a sentence; a distinguishing mark, or feature by which an animal, or person is recognised; a mark from a burn, scald, or vaccination. 1p, EXPR, 71 ee seêle, superfluous flesh; flesh that has begun to rot.
seêl6 - a measure; a receptacle; rate.
seêmana_N - a mighty one, hence monna wa seêmana, a man of war; a mightiness.
seemana - a low fence, or wall round a house, or garden, similar to logora.
seêmanê - used asa Ret. s as in o seêmanê, he is mighty.
seêmêl6 - sinc.or diêmêlê, a place for urinating; a urinal; a toilet.
seemelong - oset; urinal.
seemera - an infirmity of long standing; an old weakness, or sore.
seêm6 - a standing; importance. Se€eng N.strange, as a foreign custom; unusualness. Seesemane n.c1.7 se-, English.
seêtê - a travel-worn shoe. Seetebosigo N. ¢, eetebosigo, month of June, travel, and bosigo, night, with NEG. FORM.,se.
seetlaetIana - a cherished one; a much-cared-for child.
seêtsê - peevish child.
sêfa - Sift.
sefadima - a swift thing.
sefafalele - a Squanderer; a waster; a lavish person.
sefak6 - hail.
sefala - a large ay cornbin; a granary with the bin roofed over. w. EXPR, O Sefala matlhong, he is shameless, or callous.
sefalana - used as a variant of sefala.
sefale - an animal with one horn bent back.
sefamaeba - a species of wood; Securinega virosa.
sefane - < Se-, surname.
sefapaanê - a cross-piece; the cross on which our Lord was crucified, same as mokgôro.
sefapatlhêgê - (same as "mafapatlhogo"), 'bind, and tlhêgê, head, head-dress, or binder; mitre.
sefap6 - a band; a cord; anything that binds.
sefapêmanêgo - adhesive bandage.
sefara - the dividing of a river into two streams, or a road into two paths.
sefare - a poor, Or | inferior ear of corn.
sefata - a broad shelf; a peg, or projection for hanging things on; a pole structure for fording a river, or for the crossing of goods over a river; a pole structure in a garden, erected for people watching over crops.
sefatlha - an impudent or cheeky person; a glutton. SefatIhane n.Zeerust, RSA.
sefatlhogê - a face; a countenance; the lower part of the forehead just above the eyes.
sefawa - shrapnel; a missile; a timid person; carelessness in handling things.
sefe - s., used with nouns and pronouns of cL.7 < se-, also INTER, which; which one.
sefefo - similar to phef6 and setsuatsue, a whirlwind; a storm of wind; a cyclone.
sefêga - the breast-bone \ of a sheep.
sefeke - (same as "pheke a stallion"), or male dog.
sefela - a hymn; a song.
sefem6 - a weapon of defence.
sefêna - the shovelling end of a pig's nose; that part of a pig's nose that serves as a fender, or snout.
sefeno - probably or fena, one overthrown in wrestling; one who is overcome or conquered.
sefêphê - avery canny person; one who is very ever and wise; one given to cursing and bewitching; a disobedient person; a vile person; a person who is mentally ill.
sefêphêula - (same as "seeleele"), a fool; a foolish person.
seferê - a path between hedges.
seferwana -:7 Se, more frequently used than the latter, a narrow path between hedges.
sefešu - a useless, or dirty thing thrown away:.
sefetlhi - sinc: oF difetlhi, generator.
sefifi - a person who owing to the death of a relative is regarded as ceremonially unclean and hence forbidden to journey or mix socially; ill luck, ill fortune; the decomposed remnants of a body; a grave in which a body has been placed.
sefikantswê - a cairn; a gravestone; a heap of stones piled up for some purpose. According to tradition, passersby entering a town usually contributed to the pile to ensure good luck.
sefitlhol6 - breakfast.
sefofa - a mad person, who flees to the veld. 1D. ExPR, go ya sefofa, to elope.
sefofane - (same as "folaematshine"), aeroplane.
sefofu - a blind person or animal.
sefoka - a strong aroma, either good, or bad; a smell.
sefokaboleya - and bolea, lightly; snow.
sefolamotshegare - a form of rheumatism that gets better in the daytime, heal, and motshegare, daytime.
sefolamotshegare - N. to sekaka, a desert place.
sefolofolo - S., DER F. Vv. folotsa, brutish.
sefolog6 - (same as "lere"), which is more frequently used, a thing to descend by; a ladder.
sefolotsana - an aborted foetus of an animal; a weakling.
sefopha - a thing with which to beat, or strike the ground when cursing. Traditionally one struck the ground with a skin, etc., and called evil down upon the cursed: go ntaya sefopha.
sefOtshwana - a blockhead; a youngster who knows nothing; a person with poor eyesight.
sefuba - the chest of a person; the breast of an animal; tribute, or portion, due to a chief.
sefudi - a sharpshooter; a duck, a wild duck.
sefudu - probably a falling of the womb; a prolapsus of the walls of the vagina.
sefularê - a turning back; a departure; a succession.
sefumola - (same as "phomola"), take a breath; take a draw, or a long breath; rest a while; be relieved; be refreshed. | sefumotsê v.s. PFT. < sefumola, same as phomotsê, has taken breath; has refreshed, etc.
sefutshane - a sheep; a goat.: sefutufutu REL.S., full, or perfectly round, as a full moon. 1. Expr, kgwedi e tswa sefutufutu, the full moon is rising.
sega - cut with a knife, blade, etc.
segaba - (same as "serankure or sebantšolo"), a native fiddle.
segadikêlo - sina. oF digadikêlê, frying pan.
segafa - (same as "sebaga talama and segaga"), a bead.
segaga - (same as "sebaga and talama"), a bead.
segagabi - a creeping thing; a euphemistic way of referring to a dangerous crawling thing; a serpent.
segagane - (same as "sekgwaripana smallpox").
segagantsê - has cut into pieces.
segagantswê - has been cut into portions.
segaganya - cut into many pieces; cut up indiscriminately; cut any thick thing into sections.
segagapa - covet; a person who is covetous, avaricious, or greedy.
segagapi - an extortioner.
segagaru - (same as "Segagapda"), a person who is covetous, avaricious, or greedy.
segagodi - similar to segogotlo, an expert at tearing things up; a frank person. Segai N.an assegai; a spear.
segajaja - a very bitter cry; a loud cry of woe; a wail.
segajO - a stone engraving, or engraving on stone.
segaka - cut a lot; cut about.
segakabeng - lit. | that which puzzles the owners, same as | sejabana, sekgono or sankatle, an elbow.
segakgale - a selfwilled, obstinate person.
segakgamalêlê - a gazing stock.
segakgamatsi - that which astonishes, or causes wonder.
segakgamats6 - (same as "kgakgamats6 which is more commonly used"), a wonder.
segakolodi - gakolola, a conscience; that which reminds.
segale - a very sharp thing.
segalo - pitch (music).
segami - < digami, milking machine.
segana - lit. cut each other with a knife; hurt each other with a sharp instrument. Seganana N.CL.7 Seê-, SING. OF diganana, naughty individual.
seganka - a bold brave man; a champion; a man of valour; a fierce angry man. segankure DIAL. var, serankure, sebanjolo, sebantsolo and sebintsolo; segaba, a simple Setswana musical instrument with one string, played with a bow.
segano - when used in the ause go itshêka segano, it means to shade the eyes with the hand when gazing.
segare - S. see app. p. xxi, circular; circularly.
segarwe - ¢-,one of the large bones of a witchdoctor's outfit, used in divining.
segasatshwantsh6 - projector.
segateledi - nightmare.
segatêl6 - a tramping, or treading place, hence, segatêlê sa bojalwa, a wine press.
segatsu - (same as "bogatsu"), numbness; deadness; without sensation.
segatswetsa - numbness; a kind of rheumatism of the joints.
segau - a smell of burning, or singeing; a burnt and shrivelledup skin; a hard burnt cake of burnt blood.
segêga - become cut; have a griping pain, as in stomach ache.
segegile - has become cut; has had a griping pain, as in stomach ache.
segêla - cut for; cut and give a share of meat, bread, etc.
segêlêla - cut up; slice. (.
segêlêl6 - similar to segd, a vessel for drawing water.
sêgêtlha - same as sêba, whisper about; backbite.
segetlhile - has whispered about, or has spoken ill of a person.
segitleditse - has shaken down, as corn in a measure; has pressed, or rubbed with the elbow.
segitletsa - shake down, as corn ina measure; press, or rub with the elbow.
segd - S., blessed; lucky.
segoba - a basket for dust and dirt; a waste, or dust bin.
segobana - a small basket for dust or dirt.
segodi - (same as "nkgodi and mmankgodi"), a species of hawk; goshawk; a grown-up thing.
segodisapôn6 - microscope.
segofaditse - has blessed same as tlhogonolofaditse.
segofaditswe - has been blessed, same as tlhogonolofaditswe.
segofala - be blessed; be lucky.
segofatsa - bless.
segofetse - is/was lucky; has become blessed.
segofi - ],Same as legofi, the palm of the hand.
segogo - pit-trap; a sullen thing.
segogora - a dog, or child with a full stomach; a person who has eaten a lot.
segdgorêp6 - a much twisted, or curved piece of iron, or wood; a felloe of a wheel.
segogotlho - a tartar; a vixen; a fanatic.
segogou - an old and worthless skin; an old skinny person.
segogwane - used as variants, a frog. Segoja N.Digoja, a member of the Digoja an, a now extinct an whose totem was a lion.
segoke - similar to seaka and sefefe, a fornicator; an adulterer, an adulteress; an inveterate beggar.
segokedi - a fastener; a brooch.
segokga - a hefty fellow; a tough fellow.
segokgo - a spider. Segola v.s.simp., poke, or toss with a horn; lift up a weapon in order to strike with it. Segolagola N.same as segwelegwele, a species of yellowish ground bird; a double-banded courser.
segolê - a cripple; a deformed, or maimed person or animal.
segdlê - a slip knot; a sling.
segolo - S. < golo, much more; better than; greatly.
segomo - behaving like cattle.
segompieno - modern.
segompu - naked person.
segd - a calabash with a long handle. 1. Expr, segd sa ntlha, the first deep sleep in a night.
segongwana - a small group; a party of people.
segongwane - a young locust, just able to fly.
segonya - a hook or prong.
segootsane - (same as "segotshane"), a species of falcon; a species of small hawk, a kestrel.
segopaleswê - vacuum eaner.
segopa - a group; a crowd; a team.
segopa - S@-, a dustpan; a scraper.
segope - a species of shrub with sticking seeds, whose root is used for medicinal purposes.
segopê - similar to gdp, a very large elephant.
segopi - the dregs of a liquid; a siphon.
segopodisê - (same as "segopotsd"), a memorial; a reminder.
segopolôê - siING. oF dikgopold, same as kgopolê, mogopolê and kakany6, a thought.
segop6 - (same as "segopa").
segopotsd - (same as "segopodis6"), a memorial.
segorôê - a creek; a bay; a turn, or recess in the rocks of a gorge, or a kloof.
segoša - a patch of grass left unburnt by a fire.
segosi - royal; pertaining to royalty.
segote - shaped like a carrot; an edible root shaped like a carrot.
segotlhamên6 - toothbrush.
segotlhêla - (same as "sehuba"), phlegm; sputum.
segotl6 - (same as "seboana"), a backyard, or court; the place where the rain doctor makes rain; enclosure where produce from the fields is kept before being finally put in storage.
segotshane - (same as "segootsane"), a species of falcon. Segotso N.a hearth; a fireplace; a resemblance.
segou - (same as "segogou an old and worthless skin"),; a very old and skinny person. Segowagowe N.a loudspeaker; a loud hailer, Segowe N..S@-, a species of feathery grass which sticks.
segwaba - a' person who can accomplish or contrive to do difficult things.
segwadi - (same as "sefadi"), similar to lebêkê, a pot scraper; an iron instrument for eaning a stuffy nose.
segwagwa - (same as "segogwane"), a frog.
segwai - spirit.
segwana - a calabash; a gourd; a dumb person.
segwanti - a bully.
segwapa - biltong; a bundle of dried meat. Segwê N.CL.7 Se-, SING. OF digwê, a noose; a loop, or eye in a riem; a joint of meat.
segweetsane - (same as "segootsane"), a species of falcon.
segwêgwe - an impatient person.
segweletlha - s, very crooked, or much twisted; gnarled, or knotted, as a tree, etc.; tough, as meat not properly cooked.
segwere - a carrot-like edible root, similar to segwetê, same as segompu, naked and unclothed.
segwete - similar to segwere, an edible root shaped like a carrot; beetroot.
segwetlha - S., DER F.AN., turned-down. horns; the horns being loose and shaky.
sehelehele - S., DER F.N., quick.
sehuba - sputum; pulmonary tuberculosis; a cough.
sehumanegi - similar to mohumanegi, a chronically poor person. Sei N., Silk [borrowed].
seiaie - similar to seeleele, an idiot; a fool, a daft person; helpless one.
seikaêg6 - a thing to lean against.
seikeledisa - a thing floating on running water.
seikokotledi - crutch.
seikôkôtlêl6_N - ppp F. ikokotlela, same as seitshegetso, a support; a staff on which a person leans for support.
seila - (same as "moila which is more commonly used"), a thing about which there is tribal, or personal dread, or antipathy.
seima - S., DER F.ADJ.S. < kima, thickly, as in batho ba kokoanye seima, the people have crowded thickly together.
seimana - nightmare.
seinane - (same as "seane"), a proverb.
seinodi - the brownhooded kingfisher.
seinyoki - a wriggler; a leviathan.
seipat6 - an excuse.
seiphemêlê - that with which one defends oneself.
seiphemêlê-sehubeng ComMpP - a breast plate.
seipip6 - a veil for covering oneself.
seipone - x-ray; mirror.
seisamadi - artery.
seitaodi - an unruly individual; a lawless individual; one who is not law-abiding.
seithati - a neat, or tidy person.
seithutêl6 - profession.
seitlham6 - similar to seikam6,same as sekamê, a comb [borrowed].
seitlhotlhelets6 - that which excites itself; that which excites to.
seitsamaisi - a superior, self-possessed, selfsufficient person; one noted for something; one who regulates his own movements.
seitshegetso - similar to seikdkôtlêlê, a stay, or support.
seitshwarêlêl6 - something to hold on to, imb up by.
sejabana - (same as "sankatle and sekgono"), an elbow.
sejabele - a fastidious eater; an epicurean.
sejadi - (same as "sejwadi planter"),. is:.
sejalê - a seedling; a plant.
sejana - a plate; a vessel, etc. ¥.
sejanaga - vehicle.
sejatihapi - (same as "sekgowa"), English.
sejêla-thoko COMP - glutton.
sejêlê - the crop in birds.
sejesd - oral poison. vB. it may assume such forms as balls of hair, insects, snakes, etc.
sejeu - (same as "ntopane molomo wa thupang"),; letlalê la pele, foreskin; prepuce.
sejd - food; a type of food.
sejolo - a fiddle.
sêjwa - (same as "sebiwa"), being whispered about; being backbitten.
sejwadi - see sejadi planter. seka PREF. FORM. used with nouns to make ap. forms that have in English the ending -like, -ish, i.e. idea of likeness, or appearance, motho seka nêga, a snake-like person; conveys meaning of being artificial; being an imitation, or being false, seka molêra, an imitation of soap; used in adverbial phrases to bring about comparison.
seka - EXPR, of instantly bending to one side; turn to the west, as a shadow cast by the sun.
sêka - go to law; appeal to elders, or to a tuler for justice.
sekaba - one who oses up (ears); an ear plug.
sêkabatôp6 - fir tree.
sekabetla - siING. oF dikabetla, a piece of cardboard, etc.; a portion of food, etc.
sekaêlamaatla - index. Sekaêlêl6 N.same as sekaêl6, a pattern; an example. Sekaêl6 N.a pattern; an example. Sekai N.a sign; a copy; an example, etc.
sekaka - any impediment, or hindrance to progress; a waterless country; a desert.
sekakalepa - rarely used, same as seaka, or lebelêtê, a prostitute; a harlot:.
sekakgolokwê - hemisphere.
sekaku - boil which comes up without cause; abscess.
sekala - an open-eyed person.
sekala-matlh6 per - s, haughty-eyed.
sekale - a scale; a pair of scales; a balance; weight [borrowed].
sekaletsi - hanger; coat-hanger.
sekama - slope, slant, tilt; lie down and take a nap; lie on the side.
sekame - is sloping; was slanting.
sekamêla - slope, slant or tilt to; lie or sit in the sun; face forwards.
sekametse - has sloped, or tilted or slanted towards; has paid attention to.
sekamisa - cause to face forward; cause or help to slope, or tilt.
sekamisitse - has caused to slant, or tilt.
sekamisitswe - has been caused to slope, or slant.
sekamisiwa - being caused to slope, or slant.
sekamiwa - being lain in the sun, etc.
sekam6 - (same as "seikamê"), comb.
sekamoriri - false hair; wig.
sekamotsu - an arrow; a sign indicating direction.
sekampane - a bow.
sekanamêl6 - a couch or lounger.
sekanamê - Se@-, a poisonous bulb with yellow flowers; slangkop.
sekanêlê - similar to sekand, a seal; a signet.
sekaniri - hinge.
sekanôê - more commonly used; a seal; a cement used by bees, etc.; a wax.
sekantsa - a swollen or bloated, dead body.
seka6 - (same as "sekai"), a sign; a copy; an example; a direction.
sekapa-mantswe - tape recorder.
sekape - (same as "lekgwaphê"), sheep scab; mange, similar disease in human beings.
sekara - a share of a plough.
sekareleta - rarely used, scarlet.
sekaseka - judge, or estimate; examine; make a critical appreciation of; scrutinise.
sekasekêla - judge, estimate, or examine for.
sekaseketse - has estimated etc. for.
sekasekile - has judged, estimated, etc.
sekasekisa - cause or help to judge examine, etc.
sekasekisitse - has caused or helped to judge, examine, etc.
sekasekisitswe - has been caused or helped to scrutinise, examine, judge, etc.
sekasekisiwa - being caused or helped to examine and scrutinise.
sekasekiwa - being examined, judged, etc.
sekašwa - similar to sekara, same as lekgasa or letanta, a worn-out garment; a rag.
sekata - a rag; a wornout and worthless garment, similar to sekaswa.
sekatana - a tag; a worn-out and worthless garment.
sekate - a species of ground squirrel.
sekate - a state of danger, or difficulty.
sekaya - a pointer, or guide.
sekaya-tsela - a signpost; one who points out the path.
sekêbêkwa - an evilhearted, cruel person; a mad person; a criminal.
sekefole - same as sekafole, scaffolding [borrowed].
sekêga - hold in a slanting postion; incline; tilt up. sekêga tsêbê 1p. exer, listen to; take pity on.
sekêgêla - hold in a slanting position'for.
sekegile - has slanted, sloped, inclined, or tilted.
sekei - (For), yoke-pin.
sekêkana - a plate; a large piece of a broken pitcher or plate.
sekela - same as sekele, a sickle [borrowed].
sêkêla - avenge.
sekele - |For},same as sekela, a sickle.
sekeleditse - has cut round a brayed hide; has shaved, or cut off a Strip of hair off all round the lower part of the head.
sekeletsa - cut-round a brayed hide; shave, or cut off a strip of hair all round the lower part of head; leave a part of the head unshaven.
sêkêlwa - being avenged vindicated, etc. 1p. ExPR, go sêkêlwa ke ditshoswane.
sekênkêbêrêto - tray [borrowed].
sekêpê - (same as "Sepa"), a ship [borrowed].
sekêpê sa phufudi - steamship.
sekêrê - a pair of scissors; shears [borrowed].
sekerêpêjarata - scrapyard [borrowed].
sekêrête - ¢., garette [borrowed].
seketana - (same as "letanta"), lekgasa, same as sekatana, a Tag.
sekete - a thousand.
sekêtê - a skirt [borrowed].
seketla - see sekgapetla, a plate; a piece of broken plate, or pitcher.
seketla - chop off many branches, etc.
seketlile - or hewn out with an axe.
sekgabi - an adorned person.
sekgakgu - come to the meeting; a word used in calling people together.
sekgala - (same as "sebaka"), a long distance, a long way off.
sekgalafatshe - a low-growing shrub with leaves and thorns that resemble those of the mokgalê tree.
sekgal6 - (same as "mokgalêd"), which is more commonly used, a berry of the mokgalê tree, buffalo thorn.
sekgamatha - smudginess; dirtiness of face and eyes from a lot of crying.
sekgamma - (same as "sekonkonyane smallpox").
sekgampane - a kind of musical instrument.
sekgantshwane - Se@-, idol; an object of love, admiration, or humour in an extreme degree.
sekgaodi - a medicine for killing people.
sekgapetla - (same as "kgapetlana"), a shell; a piece from a broken vessel; a flat, level thing.
sekgapha - shell of a broken egg; a piece of broken pottery; an empty vessel.
sekgapho - a fast walker, or quick traveller.
sekgaraba - a breast without much flesh, as that of the ostrich.
sekgatlhol6 - (same as "botlhole"), same as tihakgalê, venom, fury.
sekgatshetso - a watering can; a vessel for sprinkling out of.
sekgatšh6 - a sprinkler; a watering can.
sekgêlê - a banner; a flag; a kind of umbrella made of black ostrich feathers; the wool of a black sheep wound round a stick and planted as a goal; a goal; a prize. 1p. ExPR, go tsaya mokgêlê or go phamola mokgêlê, to win a prize. sekgetla matlhê 1 pur, short-sighted. Sekgoa N.Same as Seesimane and Sejatlhapi, English manner; belonging to Europeans of English descent; the English language.
sekgôb6 - reproach; approbation.
sekgoge - (same as "seobe"), and similar to sekgophê, a hook; a long pole with a hooked end, used when collecting firewood.
sekgogetsa - a loop or eye of a hook.
sekgokgono - (same as "sekgono"), sejabana and sankatle, an elbow.
sekgono - (same as "sejabana"), sekgokgono, sekgwene and sankatle, an elbow.
sekgophê - (same as "sekgop6"), similar to sekgoge, a tool for gathering or collecting things; a hooked stick for pulling down a branch.
sekgopi - similar to sesana, a stumbling block; an offence; an occasion for stumbling.
sekgopis6 - a stumbling block.
sekgop6 - (same as "sekgophê"), a tool for gathering or collecting things.
sekgoropa - similar to lekuka, a dry skin; a dry milk sack; a wreck.
sekgoto - belonging to the Koranna; the Koranna language, same as Sekgotu.
sekgwa - a forest; a ump of trees; a jungle; a woody part of the country.
sekgwama - a purse.
sekgwamolelê - volcano.
sekgwantlhape - dikgwantlhape similar to semmpe and makgorane, a bigbellied person.
sekgwaphe - (same as "lekgwaphe"), which is more commonly used, same as motshwêêtshwêê, scab; itch.
sekgwaripana - (same as "segagane smallpox"),; vaccination.
sekgwêma - (same as "sekgwama"), a purse.
sekgwene - (same as "sekgono"), sejabana, sekgokgono and sankatle, a stump; an elbow.
sekgwethe - (same as "kgweti"), a lump, as of thick milk left in a sack when the whey is drawn off; a large amount of curd.
sekhebi - SCUIVy [borrowed].
sekhi - (same as "sekhu and sekgwo"), a ump of thorn bushes; scrub.
sekhiba - the menstrual flow.
sekhobe - a shoe made of home-made leather.
sekhophisi - (For duplicator.
sekhu - similar to sekgwa, same as sekhi, a ump of thorn bushes.
sekhukhu - (same as "mokgêlê"), an umbrella, also one made of black ostrich feathers; a prize in the rcumcision rite race.
sekhurumêlaleotwana - hubcap.
sekhurumêl6 - lid or a cover.
sekhurumetsôê - a coverlet.
sekhuti - similar to khuti, a covert; a secret place; a hollow.
sekhutlana - two jackal skins, forming part of a set of three.
sekhutl6 - an end; a termination; a stoppage; an angle; corner.
sekhutlontsi - polygon.
sekhutlêrobedi - octagon.
sekhutlôthataro - hexagon.
sekhutlêtlhano - pentagon.
sekhutula - a chief's bodyguard.
sekidi - a patch; an island; a large piece of meat, etc.
sekisa - take to court; cause or help to conduct legal proceedings; help conduct a court case.
sekisitse - has sued; has taken legal proceedings.
sekisiwa - being sued; legal proceedings being instituted against.
sekoa - a weak one; an invalid; a weakling.
sekoba - a slow one; a laggard; the last to go, or come, or do; a person, or a domestic animal that wanders about.
sekôk6 - wooden hoe (home-made); dried skin.
sekokola - a head of corn after the grain is removed; a bush harrow.
sekokol6 - a harrow for breaking ods of earth after ploughing.
sekokwalala - a cada beetle.
sekola - shave a strip of hair just above the forehead; cut hair rather untidily.
sekole - school. sekôlêkôlê REx. s, irresolute, see app. p. xxi [borrowed].
sekôlôa - a skincovered skeleton; a dry and shrivelled skin.
sekolokotêl6 - reel. Sekololo n.language of the Bakololo, in the custom, or tradition of the Bakololo.
sekomota - a short thick stump of wood; a person who is stockily built.
sekênkênyane - dikênkênyane smallpox.
sekonopiwa - a target.
sekonotiri - tar [borrowed].
sekonse - ¢, scone [borrowed].
sekontere - pitch; a black substance like tar [borrowed].
sekoo - a water bottle made of the stomach of an animal; any water bottle, or bag; any utensil for cooling water.
sekopa - a foolish person; a dry and shrivelled skin.
sekêpêl6 - (same as "sepêlêtê"), similar to selotlêlê, that which locks; a key; a safety pin.
sekopisi - (same as "sekhophisi"), photocopier.
sekêp6 - the point of a rock; a protruding, or over-extended forehead.
sekopololê - t.7 se-, dikopololê, kopolola, that which unlocks; a key.
sekoporomae - swing [borrowed].
sekor6 - more commonly referred to as mokêrê, a trough.
sekorôlê6 - scroll [borrowed].
sekêrêtane - spots on the skin; rheumatism.
sekorwêla - S.DER F.N, SING. OF dikorwêla, a clumsy person.
sekota - occiput; back of the head.
sekoti - stick.
sekotlôp6 - a cartridge; a quiver.
sekotsê - has shaved a strip of hair just above the forehead.
sekotsekara - scotchcart [borrowed].
sekukuni - a stealthy creeper; one who creeps about for an evil purpose. prov., sekukuni ga se ke se tlhdka sebataladi.
sekukuru - a skincovered skeleton; a person who is a bag of bones.
sekumukumu - sour porridge; porridge into which momela has been put.
sekumutwana - a bitten-off piece.
sekurufu - a screw [borrowed].
sekuta - motorcycle/bike [borrowed].
sekutla - more commonly called kutla, a secret place, as cracks and corners.
sekutlênnê - quadrilateral.
sekwaba - (same as "sephinyasapodi"), same as kwaba, a scaly skin disease; scale; impetigo or psoriasis.
sekwakwalala - siING. oF dikwakwalala, a cricket; the cada beetle; screeching beetle.
sekwakwetla - an unbroken sheet of ice.
sekwala - rarely used a writing tool; a pen or pencil, same as pênê and petelêto.
sekwalakwala - (same as "sekwakwalala"), a cricket.
sekwalêla - rarely used, a thing on which to write; a slate; a tablet.
sekwal6 - a title; a writing; a heading.
sekwane - similar to ting, sour dough; slightly fermented porridge.
sekwape - (same as "sekwapi"), scurvy.
sekwapi - (same as "sekwape"), scurvy.
sekwaše - squash [borrowed].
sekwatla - used mainly as a REL.s, dry and shrivelled up (of skins, berries, etc.); also dikwatla, work-gang; roving work-gang; group of people. Sekwena N.language of the Bakwena; in the custom, or tradition of the Kwena tribe; confidentially.
sekwêrêkhutl6 ' - set square.
sekwetsere - S., DER. F.N., buxom, as in mosetsana wa sekwetsere, a buxom lady.
sêla - pick; find a lost thing and take it not knowing its owner; pick up one by one; pick up, as a fowl; to pick up one by one with the fingers. 8êla v.s. APPL, burn; burn to the detriment of.
selabê - any little thing in an eye; cataract; a stain; a spot; a blot; a dirty mark; a venial sin; blemish.
selae - slice [borrowed].
selaga - a snare; a trap.
selaila - an instrument of destruction; a plague.
selala - pertaining to the inferiority of a tribe; an illegitimate child.
selalaphagê - a species of grass.
selaledi - (same as "selealei"), a tarantula spider; a detective.
selalêl6 - an evening meal; a supper; the sacrament of the last supper; an ambush; a lying-in-wait.
selalomê - (same as "sekêbêkwa and senokwane"), a cruel one; a criminal; a notorious thief.
selantopane - (same as "nkopane"), small black ant with a very painful bite. Selao N.a wild animal's sleeping place; a hare's form or bed; the pelvis.
selaolalebelê - governor; apparatus that controls the speed of a thing. Selaolê n.dilaolê, species of bush; Lantana rugosa; brandy bush; violet (colour).
selata - (same as "kgatla"), a sheath container (pocket) for knife.
selatedi - a pit for trapping ostriches and small game.
selatlhê - refuse; that which is cast away.
selawe - a species of unidentified big ants.
sele QUAL - 4TH Pos, that over there.
sele - s. another; some other; different.
selealee - (same as "selaledi"), a tarantula spider.
selebalê - s. DER. F.N, mid-day, ka selebalê, at mid-day.
selêbêlêbê - 149-, same as mang mang, so and so; such and such a thing.
seleb6 - a gazing stock.
seledu - chin of a person; a goat's beard.
seleetswane - (same as "maseleetswane"), a praying mantis.
selefera - (FoR), Silver; silver coins, or money.
selei - sledge; sled.
seleka - ¢-, an earthworm; a species of small harmless snake.
seleka - offend; behave in an offensive manner.
selekana - offend one another.
selekane - an equal; a mate; a grown-up companion; a friend or acquaintance.
selekanya - a measurement; a measuring instrument; a ruler.
selêkanyi - (same as "selekanya"), gauge.
selekany6 - a measure; a measurement; rake.
selekêga - become offended; be upset.
selekêla - offend for.
seleketse - has offended for.
selekile - has offended.
selekisitse - has caused offence.
selekisiwa - being caused offence.
selekiwa - being caused offence.
sêlêla - pick up for.
sêlêla - êka, similar to fêfêra separate meal from coarse grain; sift or winnow.
selele - a species of white grass used for thatching.
sêlêlêla - separate meal from coarse grain for; sift or winnow for. Selêlêla v.s.apri. < Selêla, name after.
selelemedi - a fast creeping thing; a thing that slides, as a snake, or a boat in water.
seleletse - has separated meal from coarse grain for; has sifted or winnowed for. Seleletswe v.s.pass. < Seleletse, is named after.
seleletswe - has been separated, as coarse grain and fine meal; has been sifted, or winnowed for.
selelê - a weeping, or crying; a mourning for a dead one.
selêma - a fool; a spoilsport; crooked horns; horns pointing in different directions.
seleme - speech impediment.
selemêla - 149-, and 7 se-, the constellation of the Pleiades, seen from Botswana at the commencement of the ploughing season.
selem6 - applies only to years, probably summer; the rainy season; the ploughing season; the hot season; the season by which the years are counted.
seleo - (same as "boleo and sebe"), which are both commonly used, a sin; a sinful thing.
selêpê - an axe.
selêpêlêl6 - a thing suspended, or hanging; a wall hanging.
selepelogane - an edible gourd, like a cucumber.
selesiuse - celsius [borrowed].
selêta - s. DER F.N. Smooth; easy, or fluent (in speech). Selete n.cL.7 se-, belong to the Balete, of Selete descent; the Selete language and customs.
selete - a deep hole i me the ground; a deep pit. Seletse v.s.prr. < sêlêlêla, has named after a person, etc.
seletse - has separated meal from coarse grain; has winnowed, or sifted.
selets6 - a musical instrument.
sel6 - a thing.
selogêl6 - a weaver's loom.
selogi - a weaver; an expert at knitting, weaving, crotcheting.
selogôê - a weaving machine; a handloom.
seloka - a species of long grass and of a herb, whose seeds stick to the othes; blackjack.
selôk6 - a rich black ay; hard-baked black earth.
selomabasêtlha - tick.
selomo - a precipice; an unsealable crevice between rocks; a deep chasm.
selêp6 - an elephant's trunk.
selêp6 - a pillow case; a pillow slip.
selête - one remaining alone after all contemporaries are dead.
seldtlêlê - sinc.or dilêtlêlê,a key [borrowed].
selotlhanyi - similar to molotlhanyi, a mischiefmaker.
selêt6 - same as selôtlêlê and kgorogorwana, a lock; a padlock [borrowed].
sêlwa - being gathered by picking up one by one with the fingers; be found, as an article that was lost.
sêlwa - lie till late in the morning; wake only late in the morning; being late in waking up; oversleep.
selwana - also similar to sejana and seaparê, a little thing; a utensil.
sema - create; innovate; introduce new or prohibited customs; liken to.
sema - roll up, as the leg of a pair of trousers, or hem of a skirt. $êma_v.s. simp. gash; make a slashing cut. Semagamaga N.CL.7 Se-, rinderpest. Semaka v.s.ExT., make many slashing cuts; gash much.
semaka - etc.
semana - (same as "semane"), has the same force as sena, when; having. E rile a semana a tswa, when he had come out. Sêmana v.s. REC, gash each other.
semana - liken one another to other things.
semana - roll each other's sleeves.
semane - a hollow ina hole or rock; a species of bees known for their ferociousness; a swarm of wasps.
semanêg6 - paste; any adhesive; gum used for sticking purposes.
semangmang - ¢., mang so and so.
semangmanyane - a little bit of anything.
semanka - (same as "mmidi"), which is more commonly used, or mmopo and semanka, the latter is still the accepted word in north-western Botswana, maize; milk tooth.
sematla - a fool; an idiot; a mentally defective person; imbecile; anything flat; something large and extensive.
semausuU - a shop with low-quality merchandise; a shop selling miscellaneous items; a hawker's shop [borrowed].
seme - S€-, a whip.
semedi - (same as "semeld"), a plant.
semêga - become rolled back, as a sleeve.
semela - a plant.
semêla - roll up for, as a sleeve.
semelafa - a native plant.
semene - S. DER F.N., curved; saddle-backed as a horse.
semenê mpôna - act of running away at great speed.
sementê - same as samêntê, cement; plaster of Paris [borrowed].
sementšhise - Sandwich [borrowed].
semera - apply soap to washing and let it remain a while; soak in soap and water.
semerêla - apply soap to washing, for; soak dirty clothes in soap and water, for.
semerile - has soaked laundry after applying soap to it.
semerisa - help to apply soap to clothing being washed.
semerisitse - has helped to apply soap to dirty linen.
semerisitswe - has been helped to apply soap to dirty linen.
semerisiwa - being helped to soak in soapy water and allowing to remain thus for a while.
semerwa - being soaked, etc., for a while. Semetsane N.CL.7 Se-, SING. OF dimetsane, a thick bead ring for the neck, twisted on a cord.
semetse - has rolled up for, as a sleeve.
semodimo - used mainly as a REL.s pertaining to the diety; godly; divine.
semôk6 - smog [borrowed].
semolaê - legal; legally.
semonamone - commonly referred to as monamone, a sage-like shrub, sucked by children, hence sweets; confectionery.
semone - a reed used for sucking up water by the mouth.
semowa - No PL, Spiritual; pertaining to spirit.
sempe - ¢-, similar to sekgwantlhape and makgorane, a big-bellied person.
semumu - a dumb person. sena after; fa ke sena go ja, after I have eaten. Sena PRIM. ID. ExPR, of grinning. §êna mênôê 1.expr, grin, or show the teeth, as a dog, etc.
senaga - no number, the open country; the countryside; the veld; pertaining to the countryside.
senagoge - a synagogue [borrowed].
senakangwedi - greenfly. Senama v.s.simp., show the teeth viciously.
senamana - NO PL, foetus, or the young of a wild animal. Sename v.s.PFr.,has shown the teeth viciously; is grinning. Senamêla v.s. APPL, grin at.
senamêlwa - being grinned at. Senametse v.s.prr. < Senamêla, grinning at. Senametswe v.s.Pass. < Senametse, being grinned at. Senamisa v.s. caus, cause (an animal) to open its mouth; open an animal's mouth. Senamisitse v.s.prr. < Senamisa, has caused an animal to have its mouth opened. Senamisiwa v.s.pass. < Senamisa, being caused to open the mouth. Senamiwa v.s. pass, being grinned.
senana - area above pubis; mons pubis.
senanatswi - (same as "tsininikane"), rain frog.
senate - senate [borrowed].
senatla - an industrious person; a person who is expert, or apt at doing something. senê NOMINAL FORM. < 16, the fourth; quartet. Senêla v.s. appz. grin at; show the teeth at, as an angry dog.
senêpê - photograph. Senetse v.s.prr. < Senêla, has grinned at.
sengalaga - cattle with big horns.
sengalê - the is commonly used, an internal bruise; a bruise from a beating or the bearing of a burden; troubles.
sengame - (same as "ngame"), a stingy, or miserly person.
sengami - the same as ngami, which is more commonly used.
sengana - (same as "logala and nthiane"), hard porridge cooked with milk instead of water.
senganga - thick or sticky porridge; ay which sticks to the wheels; hooked thorns of Acacia mellifera.
sengaparile - the grapple plant.
sengaparisi - glue.
sengape - the seed pod of the grapple plant.
sengotlamodumê - silencer.
sengwatha - the lion's share of something.
sengwe - a certain thing; something.
senka - (same as "batla"), seek; want; look for with eyes.
senkadi - very difficult; almost impossible.
senkaka - do a lot of searching; look everywhere.
senkana - search for each other.
sênkê - sheet of metal; corrugated iron, etc.; a zinc plate [borrowed].
senkêga - become sought after.
senkegile - was sought; has become sought after.
senkêla - seek for.
senkêlwa - being sought for; being wanted for.
senketse - has sought for.
senkgwê - bread; loaf of bread; hard porridge for a journey.
senkhu - probably behaving like a sheep; quietly stubborn, or resistant; unwilling; refusing to refund.
senkile - (same as "batlile"), almost; just about; nearly.
senkile - has sought.
senkisa - cause or help to search or look for.
senkisitse - has caused or helped to look for.
senkisiwa - being caused to look for.
senkiwa - as that which is lost; being sought; being wanted.
senna - no number, pertaining to man; male; manly.
sennannê - such-andsuch a thing, etc.
senngwa - being spoilt.
sennd - a seat; a thing for sitting on; a stool. sennye abDjJ.s.,small, PRov, sejê sennye ga se fete molomo.
seno CL. < Se- - 1ST. Pos., this here; nearer me the speaker; this near at hand.
sen6 - a drink.
sendga - snaky; evil like a snake. j.
senoga - become manifest, or revealed to another; become laid open to view.
senogêla - be revealed to; manifest unto.
senogêlwa - being revealed to.
senogetse - has become revealed to; be manifest.
senogetswe - has been revealed to.
senogi - an enchanter.
senogile - is revealed; is laid open to view.
sendka - sideways.
senokopêla - a wise or prudent person.
senokwane - a rogue; a villain; a robber; one of a raiding party.
senola - make manifest; bring to light; x-ray.
senolêla - reveal to; bring to light for.
senolêlwa - has revealed to.
senoletse - has revealed to.
senoletswe - has been revealed to.
senolwa - being revealed; being made manifest; being brought to light.
senona - used mainly as a REL.s, manly.
senonnore - a mythical animal.
senono - (same as "lenono which is more commonly used"), a stalk of sweet reed at the start of the ear, which when chewed serves to tie the bundle of reeds.
senote - ¢-, synod [borrowed].
senotetso - solder.
senotlele - (same as "selotlêlê"), key.
sensase - a census [borrowed].
sentêd - similar to thupa or sebetsd, a scourge; a whip.
sentiia - a bird's tail.
sentimethara - centimetre [borrowed].
sentlê - s., used with nouns of CL.7 < Se-, nice; pretty; beautiful; well.
sentlhaga - a bird's nest.
sentša - doggish; pertaining to a dog.
sentsê - has destroyed.
sentsha - cause or help to destroy.
sentsi - s., used with nouns of CL.7 < Sê-, Many.
sentswê - has been spoiled; has been impregnated.
senwane - mortar; mud, cement, etc. mixed with water and used to join bricks.
senwane - a haven; a creek; a species of native melon.
senwedi - a bog; a mudhole; deep mud.
senwêl6 - a drinking vessel; a cup.
senya - seduce; spoil; destroy.
senya - a knot in a tree where a branch has been cut off; a notch ina Stick; a nick in an arrow; quietness; a quiet place.
senyabêla - (same as "khubu"), mohubu or khujwana, the navel.
senyaka - destroy badly; mar or spoil; render useless.
senyakile - has destroyed much or badly.
senyama - (same as "senyema"), bad luck; a chronic weakness or infirmity. Senyana N.childish; simple; pertaining to childhood. Senyana v.s. REC. spoil each other; having premarital conception.
sênyane - species of grass with white heads, used for making hats. Senyê N.groin; pubic area; vulva. Senyeditse v.s.prr. < senyetsa, has done harm or damage to.
senyêga - become spoiled; be destroyed; perish, become pregnant when not married.
senyêgêla - be destroyed; perish; become pregnant when not married.
senyêgêlwa - have a miscarriage; have stillbirth.
senyegetse - is spoilt to the detriment of.
senyegetswe - has been spoilt to the detriment of.
senyegile - be spoilt, destroyed or damaged.
senyema - (same as "senyama"), a chronic sickness; weakness, or infirmity.
senyetsana - < dinyetsana, used of a cow, goat, etc., which gives milk after its calf is dead.
senyetsa - do harm or damage to; do wrong to a person.
senyêtsê - an insect that is found in tropical areas and makes a shrill sound; cada; cricket.
sed - contraction of selê, a thing. sed VERB TO BE NEG; POSITIVE Is leo.
seO - 2ND. Pos, used with N.cL.7 se-, that (thing) nearer the listener.
sedbê - (same as "sekgoge a hooked long pole used in collecting firewood"), etc.
seobê - more frequently called /eôbê, an arbour; a shed.
seodi - land at the bend of a stream; a peninsula.
seoga - develop a rash.
seogile - has developed a rash.
seoka - a large, powerful and potentially dangerous animal.
seokomana - a huge animal.
seokomêlabagwê - vrER.F. okomêla, peep, and bagwê, in-laws; a peephole in a wall from which people may be observed; hence a window.
seôla - anything used for collecting things.
seola - beat severely; scourge.
seolaka - beat severely, often or repeatedly; scourge much.
seolakile - has beaten severely and often.
sedlêla - prER.F. 6lêla, a filler.
seolo - a large anthill.
seolomankwane - a small type of anthill.
seolosê - a winnowing machine; anything used for winnowing.
seome - irregular menstruation; amenorrhoea.
seopana - a cymbal same as moopa, setwatwa and moreba, infertile (of either sex).
seope - (same as "tshêga"), a strip of skin, or oth worn by a boy to cover nakedness.
seopedi - a renowned or famous singer; an expert singer; musical instrument.
seôp6 - heap; uster; gathering; collection.
seêpê sengwe - be of one accord; be of one mind.
seoti - a bark ring for the ankle.
seotla - accessory foodstuff.
seotšwa - (same as "lebêlêtê and sepêpê"), a lewd woman; an adulteress.
sepa - be weary, as limbs after much walking; put things on one side out of the way. Sepa N.CL. SesING.oF dišepa [borrowed],a ship.
sepagam6 - (same as "sepalamôd"), a ladder; any mode of transport, such as a bicycle, a car, etc.
sepakedi - bolt.
sepakôê - a large skin water-bag; a water vessel for a long journey.
sepalangwa - vehicle.
sepane - a span of oxen [borrowed].
sepanêrê - spanner [borrowed].
sepanesi - burrweed [borrowed].
sepapetla - a flat thing; a sheet of ice.
sepapiedi - a battering ram device for pushing or striking with great force.
separe - S, See app. p. xxi, hard to break; stiff and not easily bent; a spanner.
sepatêla - hospital [borrowed].
sepatê - an unclimbable iff or wall.
sepê - S.,see app. p. xviii, nothing; something; mainly used in NEG. ExPR, ga se sepê, it is nothing; it doesn't matter; ke batlg sepê mo go wêna, I want something from yoy.
sepêkê - a spoke (ror),; in a wheel.
sepêkê - cooked skin of a pig; a very fat piece of pork.
sepekere - (FoR,a nail.
sepela - walk; travel; journey.
sepêlê - pins; badges; safety pins [borrowed].
sepêlêtê - (FoR), pin.
sepena - be quite full, as a stream.
sepêpê - similar to mogwele and setlhora, a squirrel; a dormouse; a libertine; a prostitute.
seperinka - |For), an ass.
seperuperu - (same as "setshwafu and setshwabu"), the pit of the stomach; the hollow at the base of the breastbone.
sepha - s.see app. p. xxi, brittle. 1p ExPR, go nna molomo o sepha.
sephadi - a shower of rain falling at a distance.
sephai - NOPL., same as pula ya sephai, the first rain of the season; the former, or early rain. N. PHR, pula ya sephai, the first rain of the season.
sephakwana - a narrow, flat shelf.
sephala - sephala matlh6 or sephala matlhong, a shameless one.
sephaphathegi - a very troublesome person or animal.
sephara - broad; that which is wide; a pavement; flat area.
sephatlo - a sudden death of a person or animal from some unknown cause; half, or one part out of two.
sephauphau - a basket with a lid and a handle that makes it easy to sling around the shoulder, popular with the inhabitants of the Okavango Delta.
sephekololo - an animal slaughtered before a traditional doctor begins his treatment.
sephemêlê-sehubeng - and sehuba, chest; a defence for the breast; a breastplate.
sephêra - a scapegrace; a phenomenon; the plural form is commonly used.
sephiki - intense chest pain; stabbing pain; intense shooting pain.
sephile - a solitary male blesbok.
sephinya - flatus.
sephiri - a place behind a house; a place away from a house; a quiet place; a secret.
sephoko - ot lefoko wordy.
sephoma - a part of; a section of a thing; a fairly large number of things, or people.
sephoti - threshing machine.
sephêtlwa - pod.
sephuaphue - one noted for speaking evil, etc.
sepile - as limbs after much walking.
sepiro - a man who has been to a second initiation ceremony.
sepitla - a difficult situation or position; a narrow place.
sepitlaganyane - DIM. < sepitla, a tight corner; a critical position.
sepoa - a stumpy person; a short, thick thing.
sepodisi - the khakhi weed; pertaining to police.
sepoko - similar to sedimo, a ghost [borrowed].
sepomi - shear.
sepomd - an implement for dividing something; scissors; shears; a pruning hook.
sepontšhe - sponge. Sepora N.a low stool; a low chair. Seporo N., a Spur; a rail; a railway line. Sepuputlêla Nn.a forceful wind. Sera v.s.sIMP., give a Severe pain. Sera N.an enemy troop of soldiers; an enemy. Seraba N.a bag for charms. SerafO N.a portion of anything. Serai N.a trap; a snare. Serakanêl6 Nn.a thing aimed at by two or more people [borrowed].
serala - a receptacle for unthreshed corn made of poles; a pole platform on which garden watchers stand.
seralane - similar to mosêka, a species of long grass for making bracelets.
seramatla - similar to seso, a very lazy person; a base, wicked person; a worthless, good-for-nothing person.
seramê - cold; frost.
serapa - a drove or herd of springbok, or pigs. Serap6 N.an oar.
serata-metlhaje - a person fond of wild enterprises.
serathana - (same as "serathane"), a child just weaned or just learning to walk.
serathane - (same as "serathana").
serathi - (same as "serunya"), a mole.
serati - a lover; another name for mole; mole rat. 1p. EXPR, pelo e ja serati.
seratwa - a pet.
serea - used mainly as a REL.s, idle.
serebelamo - for cerebellum [borrowed].
serêga - êga mo pelong 1p. Expr, be haunted or possessed with an anxious thought.
sêrêgêrêgê - boiled blood; cooked blood and viscera of a wild animal.
seregile - is pained.
serekisi - rcus; spectacular performance [borrowed].
serekolodi - a ransom; a thing given as a ransom.
serela - milk cooked with serola berries.
serêmapetlo - (same as "seleetswane or mmaseleetswane"), chop, and petlo, adze; a mantis insect; a Hottentot god.
serêmê - (same as "seramê"), which is more frequently used, cold; frost.
serêna - used mainly as a rReL.s. lordly; like a lord.
serenje - syringe [borrowed].
serepa - (same as "setoto and setopo"), a corpse; a person nearly dead; a very emaciated person; useless person; something moribund. Serepe N.a species of plant used as a vegetable or salad.
serepodi - stoep; a step; a Stair, either of stone or wood; a threshold; the floor of a porch leading into a house.
serêrê - s2-, same as marêrê, jelly; soft marrow; mucus-like substance.
serethe - the borrowed word bêtêrê is more commonly used.
serêthê - a person's heel; the back part of an ox's or horse's hoof.
serethwane - (same as "serathane"), Waltheria indica spp.; a species of woody plant.
seretlo - (same as "serdbê"), viscera; cooked entrails; tripe.
serêt6 - a totem; a surname.
seretologa - (same as "moretologa"), sour plum, seretologa sa podi, Ximenia americana, seretologa sa kgomo, Ximenia caffra.
serêtsê - ay; mud; a root pounded and used as a fermenter in the manufacture of khadi or honey beer; sediment, especially in fluids.
seribe - probably ExPR, ibê, a disaster; a catastrophe.
serine - stalk or sweet reed.
serinitlhokwa - a lion with a very large bushy mane.
seriri - hair that is overgrown; hair; a slaughtered animal at a marriage feast.
seririsatau - a species of tall grass.
seritê - stubble; stubble of mown grass; underground part of grass.
seritibatsi - drug (non-detrimental to health); tranquilliser.
sero - a species of edible plant, with a root like a potato.
seroa - a herbaceous perennial with small tuberous rootstock.
serobê - (same as "diretlê offal"),; cooked blood; cooked entrails; tripe.
serobi - a rod; a staff.
serobo - beer in the process of being made; beer not properly brewed.
serobu - (same as "sekwêtê"), stick, staff, or rod, often used to hit a donkey.
serodumo - disloyalty; instability of affection.
serogabalêpôê - a sign in the sky of coming rain.
serojana - an emaciated calf, child, etc.
serokamêla - (same as "serokomêlê"), an open space in the hills where animals are visible.
serokamêl6 - (same as "serokamêla").
seroka - Commiphora spp.; a succulent tree, with an edible and juicy stem.
serokolê - a bud.
serokol6 - (same as "serokole"), num-num.
serolana - yellow stool passed by children.
serolê - a starved or emaciated person or animal.
serole - Se@-, reed buck.
serôl6-botlhoko - a bush buck.
seromamowa - Se@-, same as seyalemowa, radio.
serôm6 - impetigo; infected sores; food not eaten by young people if older people are present, as kidneys. prov., ina lebe serômê.
seromololo - a peace offering; an oblation.
serope - a person's thigh; a hind leg of an animal.
serôêp6 - a small excrescence on the body; a small swelling on an animal's forehead caused by a cut made in order to distinguish ownership.
seropologane - a species of ground creeping plant with longish, smooth fruit. Seroro N.an extravagant person.
serorobe - a sluggard; a delicate thing easily crushed, used as a REL. s.to express the meaning slow; lazy.
seroroma - a bog; a quagmire, hence the Serorome valley in Botswana at the Tropic of Capricorn.
seroronya - deep mud.
seroru - a greedy person; a miser; one who gives away only what is of no use to himself.
serota - the hump of an ox, etc.; area between the shoulders.
serotêlakgamêl6 - a species of large black beetle with yellow marks; a ground beetle.
serothetsi - dropper; glass tube used for placing drops of medicine in the eye or elsewhere.
serothola - a foolish careless person; one not able to do anything properly.
seroto - S€-, same as tlatlana or totwana, a basket.
serotswana - black quarter evil. S' erowa N.a herbaceous perennial with small tuberous edible root stock; Pagodus. Serowe N.Ae, the capital village of the Bamangwato tribe.
seru - a snare; a trap made of stones.
serua - (same as "Seruwa"), a bed chamber pot; a night pot; an unfertilised egg; a rotten egg; an egg that has not hatched.
serubi - a cage; a den; a hen house; a lying-in place for a woman.
serudi - used mainly as an apv., heavy; heavily; pula ya na serudi, it rained heavily.
seruiwa - livestock; domestic animal; cat; sheep; goat; horse; donkey, etc.
seruku - (same as "jini"), a gin.
serukutlhi - a rebel; a troublemaker.
serulêlê - thatch; a tile.
serumola - a firebrand.
serumolane - (same as "thumolanê"), a troublemaker.
serunya - S@-, same as serathi and serunyi, a mole.
serunyi - (same as "serunya and serathi"), a mole.
serurubele - a butterfly; a moth of any species.
serurwana - Primigravida.
serurwane - a girl with a child.
seruthu - a useless or non-existent thing; a useless zest or struggle.
seruwa - (same as "Serua a chamber pot"),; a rotten egg.
serwala - food provided by the friends of a girl at her betrothal.
serwalatlhêg6 - and tlhdgê, head; a ringleader; head of a conspiracy.
serwal6 - a head covering; a crown. Serwê N.a joint of meat.
seša - s,used with Nns.cL se-, new; modern ways of doing and behaving. Se€Sa N.CL.7 Se-, SING. OF disa, a stump. Used as a variant of the diminutive form sesana.
sesa - cause to disappear, as darkness, night, etc.; go on till the break of day, as does a function or ceremony held in the night. sesa sefatlhêg6 1. Expr, make face to shine.
sešaba - a an; a tribe; a nation.
sešab6 - ish; sauce.
sesadi - pertaining to woman; female; womanly.
sesana - DIM. < Sesa, a small stump or projecting root. sesane aApj.s., thin; fine.
sêsêla - run about, as a dog, or jackal on a scent; flow, as water in a furrow; pass over quickly, as clouds; run slowly, as people. prov. phokojê ga a ke a latlha mosêsêlê e le wa gagwê. Sešemologa v.s.NEUT, be very numerous; be full, as a vessel; be full blown, or open, as a flower. Sešemologile v.s. rrr, are very numerous; be full, as a vessel, etc. Sešemolola v.s.caus. < Sesemologa, make full; make the hair, or feathers, stand out or up. Sešemolotse v.s.prr. < Sesemolola, has made full, etc.
sešeng - T.DERF. Se, lately; recently; a little time ago.
sešetlana - (same as "sesetlana"), a storm; a hurricane; a strong rushing wind; cold weather.
sešêtlh6 - a fleece or bundle of wool; a bird's nest woven out of the blossoms of the vaal bush; a creeper with sharp thorns.
sesêt6 - a carving; a carved image.
sesêtwa - a carving; a carved image.
sesigO - a large grain basket with small mouth.
sesikalaba - a large live coal; a fire-brand.
sesikari - 5e-, a staff or stone for carrying purposes.
sesinu - used mainly as a REL.S, coy; timid; fastidious.
sesinyi - a spendthrift; a waster; a mischievous person.
sesipi - a stump of a tree standing about a man's height.
sesiramatlhôê - goggles.
sesirarêtsê - mudguard.
sesirê - a covering; a veil; a curtain.
sesiti - a drift or bank of sand caused by running water.
sesitlhê - (same as "sesêtlhd"), a fleece or bundle of wool; a bird's nest woven out of the blossoms of the vaal bush.
sês6 - salt that has lost its flavour.
ses6 - a boil; a latrine hole; sore; pimple. S€SO N.S@-, similar to seramatla, a useless or worthless person or thing; a flavourless thing.
ses0a - a granary; a house.
sesoba - a full, bulging bag; the covering over the male genitals.
sesdlê - military.
sesdlêtere - solder [borrowed].
sešowa - used mainly as a RELS. < @ sešowa, it has its hair turned up the wrong way.
sesuga - an unpaid part of a debt; an unpaid part of an agreed purchase price.
sesupakamogêl6 - receipt.
sesup6 - a sign; evidence; a testimony; testimonial.
sesutlhi - eraser.
seswaa - (same as "tšhôtlhê and tshwaiwa meat that has become minced when cooked").
seswagadi - a plant, the root of which is used for tanning.
sešwane - a species of edible root.
seswapelo - and pelo, heart; a sloven; a deadhearted one; desperado.
sêta - Carve, as an image one; peel potatoes; cut into shape, as a peg; scrape food finely with a knife.
setale - Stable [borrowed].
setankole - (same as "magala"), coal, not charcoal [borrowed].
setapa - a wedding; a wedding dance, or procession.
setatalala - argumentative person, a nagging person; a persistent aimer of that which does not belong to him.
setatšhe - starch [borrowed].
setau - a cake of cooked blood.
seteipole - staple [borrowed].
seteitšhane - [rory station.
seteku - a special winnowing basket.
setêmpê - stamp [borrowed].
setena - brick.
setene - Same as setena [borrowed].
setenkewute - stinkwood [borrowed].
setê6 - (same as "Seitêd"), a lash; a whip.
seteraeke - strike [borrowed].
seteratakêm6 - traffic stop sign [borrowed].
seterepethomaesene - ¢., streptomycin [borrowed].
seteretšhara - (For) stretcher.
setêtê - (same as "sebeto"), a spoilt child.
setetwa - (same as "setwatwa"), moopa, used of a cow that is often serviced by the bull without conceiving.
sethadingaka - Melhania acuminata; a species of woody plant.
sethakga - neat; dextrous; ever, used of a person.
sethato - a charm.
sethibôê - a lid; a cork; a stopper.
setho - NO to a person; behaviour that is characteristic of humans.
setho - (same as "sethotho"), a fool; a lout; a useless person; a dummy; a scarecrow.
sethôb6 - noon.
sethôbôlôk6 - (same as "sethôbê"), noon.
sethokgolo - siING. oF dithokgolo traditional doctor's medicine.
sethubaganyi - a battering ram; anything used to break a wall.
sethugisi - enzyme.
sethukhuthukhu - humid heat.
sethunya - a flower; a blossom; a gun.
sethunyi - a species of wild fig, same as sethwanye.
sethusi - sedirisiwa is commonly used, apparatus.
sethwanye - (same as "sethunyi"), explosive.
setikima - stigma [borrowed].
setile - has shaped, as a peg; has carved etc.
setild - a chair.
setilê sa moikaego - a reclining seat.
setilêbanka - (same as "sofa and sofara"), settee [borrowed].
setilwe - has been shaped.
setime - a grass torch; a falling star.
setimêla - an engine; a locomotive; a train.
setinkane - a lute.
setisa - help or cause to carve.
setisitse - has helped or caused to carve.
setisiwa - has been helped or caused to carve.
setiwa - ¥etla v.s.simp.,cut with a sharp knife or axe; chew the edible parts of a bone.
setla - hit hard with a stick; pound corn in a mortar.
setlaa - (same as "letlhaa which is the form that is commonly used"), the jaw; the jaw bone.
setlangtlang - (same as "seflatla"), a fool.
setlankana - certificate; document.
setlanyi - commonly called thaeperaetara, typewriter.
setlasu - used mainly as a REL.s numbness; deadness; dead to feeling; fearless from want of thought.
setlatla - (same as "setlangtlang"), a fool; a silly person; a primitive door.
setlêga - have hunger pain in epigastrium; be well-pounded.
setlêkê - a spoilt child. Setlêla v.s.appL., cut with a sharp knife or axe for.
setlêla - hit hard with a stick; pound corn in a mortar for; wedge in by stamping in earth, etc.
setlha - a bladder.
sêtlha - s. OF COLOUR, yellow.
setlhaba - a flat place on the top of a hill; a flat roof.
setlhabakolobê - burrweed.
setlhabamokgosi - siren. Setlhabêla n.a thatching peg. Ssetlhabeletso N.a slander.
setIhabêl6 - similar to setlhabd, a sacrifice; a slaughtering place.
setlhabi - a sudden piercing pain in the body; angina pectoris; a shooting pain.
sêtlhafaditse - has made yellow; has made envious; heal; be pale.
sêtlhafaditswe - has been made yellow.
sêtlhafala - turn poor as a grass patch, etc.; become envious.
sêtlhafatsa - make yellow; make envious.
sêtlhafatswa - being made yellow; being made envious.
sêtlhafetse - has become run down, as a grazing patch; be run down; be overgrazed.
setlhaga - a nest; a bird's nest.
setlhagantsê - have separated mutually; has made half full; to part friends.
setlhaganya - cause to become separated; make half full.
setlhaganye - have become separated mutually; is half full.
setlhajwa - a pierced thing.
setIhakê - (same as "setlhakêtlhakê"), an island.
setlhako - a shoe; a sandal.
setlhanêla - (same as "setswalê or lebati"), a door.
setIhanka - servile; pertaining to servitude.
setlhantsê - has cut asunder.
setlhanya - cut asunder.
setlhapagadi - one of the bones in a witchdoctor's divining set, standing for the female element in divination.
setlhapêl6 - a wash basin; a urinal; place used as a urinal.
setlhare - (same as "molemê or moriane"), a tree; a medicine.
setlharegadi - big tree.
setlhatlhosi - lift; escalator; cage for taking passengers or goods from one floor to another.
setlhatswetso - a washing-tub.
setlhêga - make a mark by constriction; be left with a mark caused by constriction.
setlhegile - be in a state of being bruised by a cord or string.
sêtlhêla - make a mark by constriction for.
sêtlhetse - has bruised for; has cut off a piece of meat from a bone while holding it in the mouth.
setlhoa - a pinnacle; the top of a house, etc.; the imax of a play; pitch; slope of a roof or object.
setlhêbêgwa - a hopeless, good-for-nothing person; a reprobate; one given up as a bad job.
setlhodi - an unnatural animal, one that drinks its own urine, and thus brings a curse; a lewd woman.
setlhodi - (same as "setlhêla"), a spy.
setlhêg6 - the heading; the introduction; the topic.
setlhogo - used mainly as a REL ferocious, or cruel, or hard-hearted; a warmonger; a sadist.
setlhogolê - (same as "matlhogolê"), a umsy, inefficient person.
setlhêka - a solitary thing.
setlhokolane - small round wild beans of the blue gurri bush, see motlhakolane.
setlhêla - (same as "setlhodi"), a spy; a sentinel.
setlholwa - (same as "setlhdla"), a spy.
setlhomêl6 - a door; a thing planted for, or against; a fork; a banner.
setlhêm6 - a stand. setlhômê6 sa lobonê Pur,a candle stand; a lamp stand.
setlhong - a hedgehog.
setlhôpha - sina. oF ditlhdpha, a group; a company of people; a drove of animals.
setlhora - (same as "sepêpê and mogwele"), squirrel; a ground squirrel; a tree squirrel.
setlhêtlha - a maize cob with or without the grain.
setlhotsa - a lame person; a lameness.
sêtlhwa - (same as "setlhiwa"), being sawn, or divided, by sawlike cutting. Setlile v.s. prr, has chewed the edible parts of a bone.
setlile - has hit hard with a stick. Setlisa v.s.caus, make to chew the edible parts of a bone.
setlisa - help to hit hard with a stick; help to stamp corn in a mortar. Setlisitse v.s.prr. < Setlisa, has helped to cut with a sharp knife or axe. Setlisiwa v.s. pass. < Setlisa, being accompanied or made to chew edible parts of a bone; being helped or caused to chew edible parts of a bone.
setlisiwa - being caused or helped to pound corn in a mortar. Setliwa v.s. pass. being chewed, as the edible parts of a bone.
setliwa - being pounded, as corn in a mortar.
setlobolo - (same as "sethôbêlôkê"), noon.
setlogolo - a nephew; a niece; a man's sister's child; a woman's husband's sister's child; a grandchild.
setlêka - used mainly as a REL.s abstemious.
setlolêl6 - a smaller pot into which liquid is poured.
setl616 - an ointment; a cream.
setlol6 - an odd number; a number over and above a fixed one.
setlomêla - and setlhêmêlê, same as fordk6, which is commonly used, a table fork.
setlontha - similar to phutholola, unravel; unfold.
setlonthile - (same as "phutholotsê"), has unravelled; has unfolded.
setlôp6 - a tuft of hair left on top of a shaven head, same as sekopa morokotso, the point on the head of a hornless ox; a cock's comb; the tuft of feathers on a bird's head.
setlotsodipounama - lipstick.
setlôwana - (same as "thapê or kolane"), an umbilical cord. Setlwa v.s.pass., same as Setliwa, being chewed.
setlwa - being chewed.
setlwasetlwane - a species of thistle that bears red berries.
setO - ExPR, Of appearing, or coming into view instantly.
setôf6 - stove [borrowed].
setoga - be apparent; be visible; appear as young grass.
setogile - has become apparent or visible, etc.
setoki - a piece [borrowed].
setoloditse - has cut or peeled as pumpkin.
setolotsa - cut, or peel, as pumpkin, etc.; cut off the bad part of meat, etc.
setone - Same as ka bomo, on purpose; o se dirile setone, you have done it on purpose.
setopo - (same as "Serepa and setoto"), a corpse; a carcase. PROV.,sefopo re supa sa nakedi, magdêgwê re mmega a sule.
setordp6 - Strap; a thong, or halter that passes between two yoke pins [borrowed].
setoto - (same as "serepa and setopo"), a corpse.
setotojane - (same as "tsiritsiri"), a corn cricket; a species of greycoloured beetle, very destructive to grain.
setotomana - (same as "totoma"), dump.
setou - fine flour, or meal.
setsaalentswe - microphone.
setsala - more frequently called ¢sala, an animal's womb.
setsalê - more frequently called letsalê, a family; the children of one mother.
setse - already; re setse re lemile, we have already ploughed.
setse - has remained; has stayed behind.
setsênê - (same as "setsênwa"), sepêkê and sepêkwa, a mad person; an insane person. PRov, setsênê ga se se se jang ditlhare ka mêno.
setsêmwa - (same as "setsênd").
setsêtsêthd - a sieve.
setsetsi - one who is ever with the hands; a fool. prov., setsetsi se bolawa ke namane.
setsha - a plot; a plot of ground for building, or other purposes; estate.
setšhaba - a tribe; a nation.
setshamekagotlhe - an all-rounder.
setshameki - an actor.
setshamekisadirêkôtê - record player.
setshamekis6 - toy.
setšhane - overexertion; exhaustion caused by over-.
setšhe - similar to setshwe, a pause, see setšhane. 1. Expr, kgwa setshe, take breath. Setshedi N.a living person, or a thing; may mean a living animal as distinct from a living plant.
setshêg6 - a laugh; laughter; derision. pRov.,loso logolo ke ditshêgo.
setshi - Acacia hebecleda; a species of woody plant.
setshirê - (same as "sesir6"), a hanging shade, or curtain; a veil.
setsho - the whipping dance in the male rcumcision ceremony; bogwêra jo bontsho, or black bogwêra.
setšhobedi - battering ram; device for pushing or striking with great force.
setsholetsathoto - hoist; an apparatus for raising something by means of a pulley, or rope.
setsholetsi - crowbar.
setsholôê - 5se-, same as lepara, a receptacle; a vessel; anything that receives; a bier.
setšhêtlhê - the dregs of chewed sweet reed.
setšhuu - stew [borrowed].
setshwabu - (same as "setshwabo and setshwafu"), the pit of the stomach; epigastrium.
setshwaêl6 - an act of consecration or dedication; a hen, goat, sheep or cow given to a child in the hope that it will multiply.
setshwafele - (same as "masutlha"), an old, worn-out shoe.
setshwafu - the pit of the stomach; epigastrium.
setshwakga - an idle person; a lazy person. pRov., setshwakga se ja masusu, setshwaka se fasa kgomo di goroga.
setshwan6 - a likeness; a feature; resemblance.
setshwantsh6 - a picture; an image; a parable; film; bioscope.
setshwar6 - (same as "legolêgwa and lêpantiti"), a captive; a prisoner.
setshwarwa - (same as "setshwar6"), lepantiti or legolêgwa, a captive; a prisoner. pRov., setshwarwa ke ntša pedi ga se thata.
setsiba - similar to sebata, a patch; a pool in a river bed.
setsib6 - (same as "sethibd"), a lid.
setsidima - similar to tshipi and tlolôk6, a bell.
sets6 - custom; tradition.
setsôbêtla - a bog; a very muddy, miry place. ne. the place commonly called Lichtenburg in the R.S.A. is called Ditsêbêtla by the Batswana.
setsompa - (same as "setsumpa"), a fat-bellied person; a bulging sack.
setsuatsue - a whirlwind; a tempest; cyclone.
setsubaba - a spot of any colour, but white on an animal.
setsubudi - kite.
setsumpa - (same as "setsompa"), a fatbellied person.
setsuntsunyetsi segopi - siphon.
setsuolodi - a traitor; one who is false to his allegiance or acts disloyally.
setsururu - (same as "setshururu"), a careless person; an untalented person.
setswais6 - spice; flavouring essence.
setswaki - ingredient.
setswalasiphe - zip-fastener [borrowed].
setswal6 - othing; underwear; menstrual period.
setswal6 - a door; a shutter.
setswatswa - a thicket; dense bush.
setswe - being forestalled by the morning; o setswe, he was late in getting up.
setu - or not hearing any noise.
setuki - (same as "phikdkê a peacock").
setulê - luck; chance not to be confused with lesegê or masegê.
setulê - (same as "setil6"), a Seat; chair; a stool [borrowed].
setutunga - (same as "sitatunga and setitunga"), a species of antelope that is equipped with extraordinarily long and supple hooves which make it perfectly at home in the water.
seubedi - pump.
seubu - a skin disease in dogs in which both the hair and patches of skin peel off. Seušewane, N.Ae,N.S€-, same as Sausawane, a horned adder; a viper.
sewêl6 - luck; chance, not to be confused with lesegê or masego.
sewitšhebôt6 - Switchboard. Si ENUM.S, See app. p. xviii, alone; only, rona rosi, we alone [borrowed].
sia - run away; win a race; reserve; preserve; keep back a portion; leave behind.
siama - be right; be just; be straight; ga go a siama, it is not straight or right; go siame, it is right.
siame - being right; being just, etc.
siamêla - be fit for; go in a straight line.
siameseditse - has set right for.
siametse - was fit for; went ina straight line.
siamisa - make straight;set right.
siamisediwa - being set right for.
siamisetsa - straighten for; set right for.
siamisetswa - (same as "siamisediwa"), being straightened for.
siamisisa - help to set right.
siamisisitse - has helped in correcting or repairing a thing.
siamisisiwa - being helped to set straight.
siamisiwa - being made straight; be set right.
siamolola - do wrong; do unjustly; become wrong.
siamololêla - do wrong to; ill treat; be unjust to.
siamololetse - has done unjustly to; has done wrong to.
siana - run; run together in a race; race.
sianêla - run towards; run for.
siantsha - cause to run; transport quickly to.
siantshitse - has rushed a thing to. sianya V.Ss.CAUS. < siana, cause to miss each other.
- Sianye - have missed one another.
siba - similar to thiba, plug or stop up, as the ears.
sibi - a cake of dry dung.
sibile - has plugged, or stopped up, as the ears.
sibitlê - a sprained, or strained wrist.
sibola - cut with one cut.
sibotsê - has cut with one cut.
sidila - rub, or massage; shampoo; rub hard or press hard, as in anointing a sick person.
sidilêga - responding to being massaged; improve in health.
sidilegile - has improved in health; be ironed.
sidilêla - smooth-out for.
sidile - has ground, corn into meal.
sidilwa - being massaged; being pressed as clothing; being given medical attention.
sidilwe - has been ground, as corn into meal.
siditse - has massaged; has shampooed, etc.
siêla - give a drink to; leave some food, etc., for; escape to; leave behind, in a race; reserve for; give water to drink.
sietse - has given water, tea, etc. to; has left some food, etc., for; has escaped to.
sigama - indicating the approach of calving.
sigame - has had swollen teats indicating the approach of calving.
siile - has left behind in a race; has outdistanced runners; has left or reserved some food, etc., for.
siilwe - has been reserved; has been left behind.
siisa - cause to reserve, to put away, or to one side.
siisitse - has caused to run away; has taken to a place of safety.
siisiwa - being caused to run away; being taken to a place of safety.
siiwa - being outrun in a race; being left behind; being reserved.
sijwanyane - a species of short grass.
sika - go a long way; find a suitable spot on which to build a home, a cattle kraal, etc.; relation, short form of lesika.
sikara - be pregnant; sling, or carry something slung over the shoulder; carry on the shoulders, as a pole, or a sheep; carry something slung between two bearers.
sikarêla - carry on the shoulders, as a pole etc., for.
sikaretse - has carried on the shoulders, as a pole, or any other object.
sikarisa - cause or help to sling, or carry something slung over the shoulder.
sikarisitse - has caused or helped to carry something slung between two bearers, or on the shoulders.
sikarisiwa - has caused or helped to carry something slung between two bearers.
sikariwa - (same as "sikarwa").
sikarwa - being carried on the shoulders, as a pole or a sheep, ete.
sikêla - find a spot suitable for erecting a home, kraal, etc., at.
sikêlêla - pursue or blame wrongfully.
sikere - is slung across the back or carried over the shoulder, etc.
sikorola - unsling.
sikorotsê - has unslung.
sila - as meal; grind to powder; digest.
silantope - ¢-, same as nkopane and mantlopane.
silêga - become ground into powder, as dry corn.
silêga - smear cow dung or goats' droppings on the udder to discourage the calf or kid from sucking.
silêla - grind for.
silêlwa - being ground for.
siletse - has ground into powder for.
silintara - cylinder [borrowed].
silofaditse - has made stubborn or cheeky; has confounded or confused; has caused to be troubled.
silofadiwa - being confounded or confused; being made stubborn or cheeky, ete.
silofala - become foolish; become troubled; be amazed; be in doubt as to what may happen; be stubborn or cheeky.
silofatsa - confound; confuse; cause to be troubled, or amazed; make stubborn or cheeky.
silofetse - has become doubtful or confused; has become stubborn or cheeky.
silwa - being ground.
simaganyeditse - has piloted a boat, etc.
simaganyetsa - pilot a boat, etc.
simalala - be upright; be perpendicular.
simaletse - be in an upright or perpendicular state.
simana - be right; be straight; be just.
simane - is right; is straight; is just.
simêga - turn a person or animal back onto the path; turn from one course to another; warn, and thus turn back; guide.
simêga dikgomo - guide the oxen (especially with the whip).
simegile - has turned a person, etc., back onto the path.
simoga - begin.
simogile - has begun.
simola - UsED As ADV., only; just lately; o simola a tswa, he has just come out.
simolodisa - cause or help to begin.
simolodisitse - has caused or helped to begin.
simolodisiwa - being caused or helped to begin.
simologa - begin.
simologêla - begin for, or at.
simologile - has begun.
simolola - begin (actively).
simolotsê - 1. < simolola, has begun, as a machine that is doing a job.
sinalala - look askance at.
sinaletse - has looked askance at.
sinama - be dainty, or fastidious in eating.
siname - is dainty, or fastidious in eating.
sinoga - move out of the light, or out of a person's way.
sinogile - has moved out of the light, or the way.
sinosa - reveal; expose by uncovering; let light upon.
sinosetsa - similar to fenosetsa explain to; clarify for; unveil, or uncover for.
sinositse - has revealed; has let light upon.
sinosiwa - being revealed, etc.
sipa - be stiff and sore, as tired limbs. Sipi N.CL.9N-, SING. OF disipi [borrowed], zip.
sipile - have been stiff and sore, as tired limbs.
sipoga - strain; be startled; shudder; sprain or become sprained, as a leg.
sipogile - has become sprained as a leg, etc.
sipotsê - has broken or severed with one cut.
sira - shade; obscure each other's view. Sirasirana v.s.REc., shade or obscure the view of each other. Sirasiranye v.s.PFT. < sirasirana, have shaded or obscured the view of each other.
sirêga - become shaded or shadowed; be in a state of uncertainty.
siregile - has become shaded or shadowed; has become uncertain. Sireleditse v.s.prr. < sireletsa, has protected, as a guardian.
sirelediwa - being watched over; be hovered over, as a bird watching its brood in the nest.
sireletsa - protect, as a guardian; watch over hoveringly, as a bird its brood in the nest. Siriwa v.s. Pass. same as sirwa, being shaded; being covered, as with a veil; being concealed from sight.
sirologa - become uncovered or unshaded.
sirologile - has become uncovered or unshaded. Sirolola v.s. REV. < sira, uncover; take a shade off; unveil. sirolola dipelo 1. Expr, uncover the hearts or minds.
sirolotsê - has uncovered or unveiled.
sirwa - (same as "siriwa"), being shaded.
sisa - give large quantities of milk; flow or spout out, as from a jet or as blood from an artery; lactate.
sisa pelo - sob; sigh. Sisale N.CL.9N-, SING. OF disisale [borrowed], sisal. Siseditse v.s. PFT. < sisetsa, be heavily laden with milk for.
sisediwa - being with much milk for.
sisêla - carry a heavy object on the head supporting it with the hands.
sisêtsa - give large quantities of milk for.
sisibaditse - has made calm, or quiet or still.
sisibadiwa - being made calm, etc.
sisibala - become calm; become quiet steady or firm.
sisibatsa - make calm, quiet or still.
sisibetse - be calm, quiet or still.
sisimoga - respect; reverence; be simple; be quiet, grave; be bashful; be coy; to draw back startled in order to avoid something.
sisimogêla - revere for the sake of; be bashful for.
sisimogile - was respectful, etc.; was bashful, coy, grave, etc.
sisimosa - give the creeps, as an insect crawling on the flesh; set the teeth on edge, as a grating noise; rouse or disturb.
sisimosa-mmele - make one feel nervous and traumatised.
sisimosa-pelo - rouse or trouble the conscience.
sisimositse - has given one the creeps, etc.; has roused or disturbed.
sisinu - s. coy; timid; fastidious.
sisisa - cause to have lots of milk; cause to burst out with a spurt, as blood from an artery.
sisisitse - has caused to have lots of milk; cause to burst out with a spurt, as blood from a cut artery.
sisisiwa - being caused to have lots of milk, etc.
sisitlêga - abate, or decrease, as a sickness.
sisitlegile - has abated or decreased, as a.
sickness - botlhoko bo sisitlegile, the illness has abated.
sisitse - has lots of milk; has burst out with a spurt, as blood from a cut artery.
sisiwa - giving much milk; flowing, or spurting out, as blood from an artery.
sita - overcome; excel; surpass; exceed; be of greater value.
sitêga - be overcome; be tired out, as poor or weak beasts of burden; be unable to.
sitegile - is overcome, as by speech; was tired out, as a weak beast of burden.
sitile - has overcome; has exceeded, etc.
sitilwe - being overcome; be feeling cold.
sitisa - 's failure; render it difficult for fellow competitors to excel; cause to feel cold.
sitisitse - has surpassed; has excelled; has caused another to feel cold.
sitisiwa - being made to endure cold weather; being caused not to excel; being incapacitated.
sitiwa - (same as "sitwa"), feeling cold.
sitlholola - put down a heavy load.
sitlwane - a little thorn weed.
sitlwasitlwane - (same as "setlwasetlwane a species of thistle that bears red berries").
sitologa - go unwillingly when sent.
sitologa - become warmed after being cold.
sitologêla - put in a position to become warm.
sitologile - | sitwa v.s. Ass. Same as sitiwa, feeling cold. $0A NSHORT FORM OF Sesod, SING. OF disoa, a granary; a hut at the back of the yard used as a storeroom.
sobasoba - move timidly.
soba - mix bran, meal, etc., with a liquid and stir; make civil; inculcate, teach; make sociable. Sobêla v.s. simp.,ram hard. Sobêlêla v.s. simp., be dissatisfied with a thing, as with a purchase. Sobeletse v.s.prr. < Sobêlêla, has been dissatisfied, as with a purchase. Sobetse v.s.prr. < Sobêla, has rammed hard.
sobiwa - (same as "sojwa"), bran meal, etc., being mixed with a liquid and stirred; being made civil, cultured, sociable, etc.
sobokana - come together; gather together into one lot.
sobokantsê - has gathered into one lot; has included.
sobokantswê - have been gathered into one lot; have been included.
sobokanya - cause to sum up, as numbers; bring together into a whole.
sobokanye - have come together; has gathered together into one.
soboka - gather together; become one.
soboloka - ravage; destroy; bundle; throw carelessly into a receptacle; fold carelessly, as linen.
sobolokile - has thrown carelessly into a receptacle. Sobêtla v.s. simp. trample under foot, as mud, snow, etc.; trample on linen, blankets, etc. Sobotlile v.s. rrr, has trampled underfoot, as mud, snow, etc.
sodiamo - Sodium [borrowed].
sodile - (same as "sotsê"), has smoothed out; has brushed lovingly; be shining owing to being in good health.
sodisa - cause or help to smooth out; cause or help to stroke, as a cat.
sodisitse - has caused to smooth out.
sodisiwa - being caused to smooth out.
sofa - (same as "setildbanka"), a sofa. Sogêga v.s.NEUT, be agitated, as an excited crowd; be shaky, as spokes of a loose wheel; shake. Sogomile v.s.prr, has become agitated, as an excited crowd.
sogotlha - rub between the hands, as in washing; move a knife up, down and sideways, inside the neck of a goat, etc., when killing it.
sogotlheditse - has rubbed effectively between the hands, as in washing; has stabbed and moved the instrument about.
sogotlhetsa - rub hands, or laundry, as in washing; make cutting movements inside a goat's throat when killing it.
sojwa - (same as "sobiwa"), bran meal, etc.
soka - strangle; squint; twist; wring; turn round; wind, as a watch; an expletive meaning, get lost. sêka leitlh6 v. pur, look with one eye partly closed and the other lid puckered; squint.
soka - ¢-, same as siki a sixpenny coin; sixpence, equivalent in value to five thêbê or to five cents [borrowed].
sêkama - become crooked; become wrong.
sdkame - has become crooked; has become spoiled, or bad.
sdkamêla - lean to; bend to one side; incline to.
sdkametse - has inclined to; has leaned to.
sêkamisa - cause to be crooked; make crooked; cause to err; cause to lean to one side.
sêkamisitse - has caused to be crooked; has made to err.
sêkamisiwa - being caused to be crooked.
sêkamiwa - (same as "sOkangwa"), being crooked; being leaned to a side.
sêkasêka - jostle; pull from side to side; strive either with body, mind or speech.
sêkasêkana - strive together; wrestle.
sdkasôkêla - jostle for; pull from one side to another for.
sdkasoketse - has jostled with, over a matter.
sêkasokile - has jostled; has pulled from side to side; has striven either with body, mind or speech.
sêkasokisa - help or cause to jostle.
sdkasokisitse - has helped or caused to jostle.
sêkasokisiwa - being jostled.
sêkasokiwa - (same as "sdkasdkwa"), being wrestled with.
sêkasêkwa - (same as "sêkasokiwa").
sêkêga - be dislocated.
sokêla - turn, or twist for; squeeze into.
sokeleditse - has wrung, as the neck of a bird.
sokeleditswe - has been wrung, as the neck of a bird.
sokelediwa - being wrung, as the neck of a fowl.
sokeleletsa - trundle for; twist or wring for, or to.
sokeletsa - twist and turn; coil; wring.
sokeletsêga - become twisted; responding to being wrung.
sokeletsegile - has become turned and twisted.
soketse - has had difficulties; has turned or twisted for; has squeezed to or for; trundle. Poo eeeeeeeeeeeaesesaia'"'"<iae 378.
sdkôla - suffer hardships in performing a task; do | everything vigorously and persistently. |.
sokologalana - be reconciled.
sokologalanye - have turned to each other; have been reconciled.
sokologa - be turned back; turn back or round; repent.
sokologêla - turn round to; turn towards: repent to. j.
sokologile - has repented; has turned round.
sokolola - turn (a thing) back, or round actively.
sokololana - convert each other.
sokololêla - etc., for; convert for, or to.
sokololetse - has turned round, etc., for.
sokêlwa - suffer hardships in performing a task; do everything vigorously and persistently.
sokonoga - (same as "sokologa"), rarely used.
sokonola - (same as "sokolola"), convert.
sola - make smooth; stroke as a cat.
sola - sole [borrowed].
sola molemo - use, or put to a good use; make good use of; put to good account. wp. ExPR, go Sôla motho, to have ill will towards, or against; to do someone in; to belittle someone.
solêga - become smoothed, or stroked.
solêgêla - êgêla molemo 1p. Expr, be benefited by; receive benefit; be of benefit to.
solegile - has been benefited by.
sêlêbêsê - 9n-,a plant used as tea.
solobotla - s, similar to mošampa and segwere completely naked.
solofedisa - (same as "solofetsa"), cause to hope.
solofedisitse - has caused to hope.
solofedisiwa - being caused to hope; being promised.
solofeditse - has promised.
solofediwa - being promised.
solofêla - expect, or look for confidently; be pregnant; be in labour.
solofêlêsêga - become hopeful; be in a hopeful state; be hoped for.
solofelesegile - has become hopeful.
solofetsa - cause to hope; promise.
solofetse - has hoped; be expectant; be looking forward confidently to.
solofologa - cease hoping; despair.
solofologile - has ceased hoping.
soma - be full; complete; make a thick hedge, as round a front yard; reinforce a fence, a thatch, a bundle of grass, etc. %$ma_v.s. simp. make a presentation to someone of higher status.
soma - a bulb of any plant.
somarêla - take great care of; use sparingly.
somaretse - has taken great care of; has used sparingly.
somê - ontracted form of lesomê, ten; the tenth.
someditse - has made ten; made complete. %6mêla v.s. APPL, give something that has been found, or killed to a superior.
sêmêla - push into; push in a sheath.
someng - decimal.
sometsa - ê, make ten; make complete. Sometse v.s.PFr. < Sôma, has passed on to a superior that which someone else lost.
sometse - has pushed into; has pushed into a sheath.
somile - has made a thick hedge, as round a front yard; has packed grass well into bundles.
somisitse - has caused to refine or reinforce grass thatch, etc.
somisiwa - being caused to reinforce the hedge or fence, as round a front yard, ete.
somiwa - being reinforced, as poles of a yard.
somoga - be pulled out of; be unsheathed, as a sword.
somogêla - or for.
somola - pull out; unsheath; draw out; extract.
somolêla - pull out for, as a sweet reed from a bundle.
somoletse - has pulled out for; has extracted for. Somotsê v.s. PFT. < somola, has pulled out; has extracted.
sêna - (same as "sOnê"), it.
sênê - (same as "sOnaq"), it.
sonêla - groan; groan in sleep; gasp and pant in pain; breathe noisily; draw the last breath.
sonetse - has groaned; has gasped and panted in pain, etc.
sonolêga - refuse to do something;»be stubborn; obey unwillingly.
sonolegile - has refused to do something.
sonotsê - has led by the ear. Sontaga N.CL.9¢.,SING. oF Disontaga [borrowed], Sunday.
sopaladitse - has stretched out.
sopalala - similar to namalala, become stretched out; be stretched out.
sopalatsa - stretch out.
sopaletse - has become stretched out.
sopana - similar to gaupana, turn up, fold up, or curl up, as leaves in the sun, or a wet skin when becoming dry.
sopantsê - has caused to turn fold, or curl up, as leaves in the sun.
sêpanya - cause to turn, fold up, or curl up, as leaves, or a wet skin when drying out.
sêpanye - has turned up, folded up, as leaves in the sun, or a wet skin when becoming dry.
soporano - soprano. Sošama N.N.,an onyx-like stone [borrowed].
sosobagana - (same as "sosobana"), be wrinkled, crumpled, or creased; be confused, or confounded.
sosobagantsê - has caused to be creased, wrinkled, etc.
sosobaganya - make creased or wrinkled; confuse; cause or help to be confused. sosobaganya sefatlhêgê v.rHr, avert the face, as in anger, shame or sorrow.
sosobana - crease, wrinkle; be wrinkled crumpled, or creased; be confused or confounded.
sosobantsê - (same as "sosobagantsê"), has creased or wrinkled; has confused, as when a person is caught doing wrong.
sosobanya - cause to crease or wrinkle; cause to crumple up.
sosobanye - (same as "sosobaganye"), be wrinkled; be crumpled or creased; be confused or confounded.
sosobêga - similar to fitlha, hide; conceal.
sosobegile - has hidden; is hidden.
sosologa - come out into the open; become frank.
sosologile - be out in the open; has become frank.
sosora - similar to folola and phdtlha, rub corn, etc., in the palms of the hands.
sosorêga - be rubbed, as corn, etc., in the palms of the hands.
sosoregile - has been rubbed, as corn etc. in the palms of the hands.
sosorêla - rub on, or into.
sosoretse - has rubbed on, or into.
sosu - ¢,a mythical bird believed to have produced milk during famines.
sosueleditse - (same as "roroeletsa"), has incited to; has urged.
sosueletsa - (same as "roroeletsa and sosuetsa"), incite to; urge.
sosuetsa - (same as "sosueletsa and roroeletsa"), incite to.
soswana - ¢,DIM. < sosu, a young deafmute; a bird which according to Tswana folk-lore secreted milk in times of famine.
sotla - deride; mock; ridicule; scoff at.
sotlaka - take pleasure in deriding; mock ridicule, or scoff a great deal.
sotlana - mock, ridicule, or scoff at each other.
sotlêga - suffer hardships; go through a great deal of trouble; be made to suffer.
sotlêgêla - suffer as a result of; suffer for.
sotlêla - cause hardship to, or for.
sdtlha - (same as "swatlha"), poke at something that is in a hole.
sotlhêla - (same as "swatlhêla"), poke at something that is in a hole.
sotlhetsantsê - (same as "swatlhetsantsê"), has thrust in with violence.
sotlhetsanya - (same as "swatlhetsanya thrust in with violence").
sotlhetse - (same as "swatlhetse has poked at something that is in a hole"),; has poked for.
sotlhomeditse - has thrust in; has pushed in.
sotlhêmêla - similar to gatlhamêla, fall in as into a hole in the dark; pass through; rush in; rush forward; charge, as cavalry.
sotlhometsa - thrust in; push in; cause to rush forward; cause to charge.
sotlhometse - has fallen in as into a hole in the dark, etc.
sotlile - has mocked, ridiculed, etc.; has caused untold suffering.
sotlisa - help to bring hardship to; help or cause to mock.
sotliwa - (same as "sotlwa"), being made to suffer.
sotlomeditse - (same as "sotlhomeditse"), has thrust in.
sotlomêla - similar to gatlhamêla, same as sotlhêmêla, fall in.
sotlometsa - (same as "sotlhometsa"), thrust in.
sotlometse - (same as "sotlhometse"), thrust in.
soulo - same as sola, sole [borrowed].
souta - immune.
soutile - to be immune. sua vex; tease; roast over a large fire; overcook food.
suane - ¢-, a troublesome | person probably to roast in hot ash. Monna yo ke suane o nnêla go sua batho.
suasua - scold violently; find fault with, in an angry manner.
suasuile - has scolded violently.
suasuisa - mob; cause to scold violently.
suasuisitse - has mobbed.
suba - hide something or someone; knead half-dry dough.
subêga - become hidden. |.
subêgêla - become hidden from.
subegetse - has become hidden from.
subegile - has become hidden from.
subêla - hide from; put too much into at one go, as food into the mouth; press in with the hand.
subêlêla - train; compel; push away or in.
subeletse - has constrained; has pushed away, or in; has disappeared in a dense crowd.
subetse - has hidden from; has pressed in with the hand.
subile - has hidden something or someone.
subiwa - (same as "sujwa"), being hidden.
subologa - become uncovered (of a hidden thing), or exposed (of a hidden person).
subologile - has become exposed; has become uncovered.
subolola - uncover anything hidden; expose a hiding person.
subolotsê - has uncovered something that has been hidden; has exposed a hiding person.
sudile - grieved.
sudisa - grieve; cause to grieve.
sudisitse - has grieved; has caused to grieve.
sudisiwa - being grieved; being caused to grieve.
suduta - (same as "duêla"), pay, or reward.
sudutile - (same as "duetse"), has paid, or rewarded.
suga - bray skins, or plait riems; trample on; trample to pieces.
sugakana - become broken; become trampled, or creased.
sugakantsê - has trampled to pieces; has creased clothing.
sugakanya - trample and crumple; put into disarray, as clothing that was well arranged.
sugêga - be distressed, or troubled through hard efforts; become well brayed.
sugegile - be well brayed; has become brayed.
sugêlêla - 1nr., crumble finely through pressure; crush and pound, as when grinding snuff.
sugeletse - has crumbled finely by pressure.
sugile - has brayed; has trampled to pieces.
sugilwe - has been brayed.
sugisa - cause or help to bray.
sugisitse - has caused or helped to bray.
sugisiwa - being caused to bray.
sugiwa - (same as "sugwa"), being brayed.
sugwa_ - (same as "sugiwa"), being brayed.
suile - has vexed or teased; has roasted over a large fire.
sujwa - (same as "subiwa"), being hidden.
sukasuka - pull from side to side; jostle. sukasukana vV.s. REC, strive together; jostle with each other.
sukasukanya - have striven together.
sukasukile - have striven with by act or word; has pulled from side to side; has jostled.
sukêla - (same as "subêla"), hide from.
suketse - has pressed in with a hand.
sukula - bore a hole in leather.
sukunyeditse - has forced one thing between others.
sukutsê - has bored a hole in leather.
sula - mourn; become grieved. Sula pelo 1p. Expr, be grieved; become disappointed. Suladitse v.s.prr. < sulatsa, same as sulafaditse, has made evil, or bad; has made to taste bad; has caused to lose interest; has distressed.
sulafaditswe - has been made uninteresting; has been made to taste bad; upset.
sulafaditse - has made evil or bad, has made to taste bad; has caused to lose interest.
sulafala - become evil, or bad; be disagreeable in taste, etc., be grieved.
sulafalêla - be disagreeable in taste.
sulafalêlwa - being very bad for; develop a loathing for; lose appetite, or interest in something; be distressed by something; suffer anorexia.
sulafaletse - has become very bad for; has made one lose interest in.
sulafaletswe - has lost interest in.
sulafatsa - or make something taste bad.
sulafetse - has become evil or bad. sulatsa short form of sulafatsa, make evil or bad.
sule - has died. prov., motlhêka sa gagwê ke mo ka a suleng.
suma - make a noise, as a river, or wind; ring, as the ears; hiss, as a snake; breathe hard.
sumaka - make a lot of noise, as a river etc.; hiss or puff a great deal.
sumantsê - has cooked much food; has cooked and eaten in one day the provisions meant for several days.
sumanya - cook a lot of food; cook and eat in one day the provisions for several days.
sumeditse - has poured out in a stream.
sumêla - eat to one's delight; eat large amounts of.
sumetsa - pour out in a stream. Sumo aDj.s., white-faced.
suna - (same as "atla"), kiss a lot.
sunaka - kiss much. —.
sunana - kiss each other.
sunêla - kiss for.
sunisa - (same as "suntsha"), cause to kiss. suniwa vV.S. PASS. Same as sunwa, being kissed.
suntsha - cause (one) to kiss.
suntshitse - has caused (one) to kiss.
suntshiwa - being caused to kiss.
sunnê - has kissed.
sunnwê - has been kissed.
sunuka - put a lot of things together; pull from side to side, as a tight pole.
sunukile - has put a lot of things together.
sunwa - (same as "suniwa"), being kissed.
supa - point out; point at, with the index finger, hence seven; show; testify; prove.
supabaloi - 9n-, index finger.
supafala - become testified to or proven; become clear, or evident.
supafetse - has been pointed out, or shown, etc.
supana - point each other out; point an accusing finger at one another.
supeditse - (same as "supegeditse has pointed out"), or shown to, etc.
supeditswe - (same as "supegeditswe"), has been shown; has had something shown to one.
supediwa - (same as "bontshiwa"), being pointed out, etc. to; being shown something.
supêga - be shown, or proved; be pointed out.
supegeditse - has shown to etc., same as supeditse.
supegediwa - Šs. < supeditse, same as supediwa, being pointed out, etc.
supegetsa - show to; point out to; testify.
supêla - offer to; offer for; sacrifice; bear witness for; testify on behalf of.
supêlêla - êlêla, predict.
supeletse - has predicted.
supetsa - (same as "supegetsa show to").
supetse - has offered for; has testified on behalf of.
supile - has shown; has testified; has witnessed; be pointing at.
supilwe - has been shown; has been made public knowledge.
suphafosefeite - 9N-, {(FOR], superphosphate.
suphamakêtê - ¢-, supermarket [borrowed].
supiwa - being testified to; being pointed out; being manifested to.
supolola - do away with; upset (the law); uncover something hidden; expose some unpalatable fact.
supuU - of bolting, or darting away.
supuditse - has trampled upon; has pressed upon, injured, spoiled or defiled; has rolled in hot ashes, or dirt, etc.
supuditswe - has been trampled upon, ete.
supudiwa - (same as "suputswa being trampled upon"), and defiled, or dirtied; being rolled in sand or dirt.
supula - wallow in sand, or dust; roll about in sand, or dust.
supuletsa - cause to wallow in sand or dirt for.
supuloga - bolt, or dart away; come out of the blankets in the morning; get out of bed hurriedly.
supulogile - has bolted, or darted away.
supulotsê - has done away with; has uncovered something hidden.
suputsa - press upon and injure, or spoil; cause to wallow or roll about in sand, or dirt.
suputsana - make one another filthy, or dirty by rolling, or wallowing in sand.
susonyea - travel about dissatisfied.
susonyeile - has travelled about dissatisfied. SUSU N.CL.1A¢-, SING. OF bosusu, a red-breasted bird; a deaf person. susuntsha vV.s.SIMP.,same as susura, eat very much.
susuntshitse - (same as "susurile"), has eaten very much.
susura - eat very much; eat greedily.
susurile - has eaten very much; has eaten greedily.
suta - move away.
sutêla - give place to.
suteleditse - < suteletsa has caused to move near.
suteleditswe - has been caused to move near.
sutelediwa - (same as "suteletswa and atamediwa"), being caused to move near; being pushed towards; being brought near.
sutêlêla INT - Move very near; come much nearer.
suteletsa - cause to move on; push near.
suteletse - has moved much nearer; be much nearer.
sutisa - cause or help to move; push.
sutisetsa - cause to move for.
sutisitse - has caused to move.
sutisiwa - (same as "sutiswa"), being caused to move; being made to move.
sutiwa - being moved.
sutlha - rub, or brush something off a person; crush something in a mortar; groom a horse; polish, as boots; push, or make way through bushes; make an escape from an enclosure.
sutlhêla - rub, or brush, etc., for; groom a horse for; push through bushes; make an escape from an enclosure.
sutlhisa - help to groom; cause to make way through bushes.
sutlhisitse - or brush something off.
sutlhisitswe - has been caused or helped to rub, or brush something off; has been helped or caused to make way through bushes.
sutlhisiwa - being caused to tub, or brush something off.
sutlhiwa - (same as "sutlhwa"), being groomed, or polished, etc. sutšwa vV.S.PASS. < supa, same as supiwa, being testified to; being pointed out; being manifested to.
sutukheisi - 1A¢-, (FoR) suitcase.
swa - die. ID.EXPR, go swa Senku. PROV. khutsana e sa sweng e leta mondênê. swa ka ditshêg6 i. exer, laugh much. prov., loso logolo ke ditshêgê.
swaa - Similar to kgdba, minced meat that is already cooked; stir meat in a pot with a view to mincing it.
swaaletse - has broken up, or dispersed, as clouds, or a crowd.
swaba - dry up; fade, as grass, etc., ona hot day; wither; become disappointed; have hopes dashed; augur; conjecture; to rise as sun; guess. 1D. ExPR, go swaba nko go fetisa molomo.
swabêla - fade, as grass, etc., on a hot day for; become disappointed with.
swabetse - has faded, as grass etc., on a hot day.
swabile - be faded, as grass, etc., on a hot day; has withered; has become disappointed, has become embarrassed, etc.
swabisa - cause to fade; disappoint expectations; cause to shrink; crumple; contract or draw together. 1. Expr, swabisa ngwaba, propound a riddle.
swabisiwa - being caused to fade, etc.; having expectations disappointed.
swabiwa - being disappointed.
swabola - pull one thing off another; pluck; similar to swapola.
swabolêla - pull a thing towards.
swaboletse - has pulled a thing towards.
swabotsê - has pulled one thing off another.
swabuka - Z0 Over.
swabukile - has gone over.
swaeditse - has tightened the noose.
swaêga - become minced, said of meat that is well cooked.
swaegêla - become well minced for, said of meat that is well cooked.
swaegile - has become well cooked and minced (of meat).
swaêla - stir and mince cooked meat for; swerve to, or for; rain ina continuous downpour; hold on for a long time; delay long. Swaetsa v.s.CAUS., cause to contract (verb).
swaetsa - inhale.
swaetse - has stirred and minced meat that is cooked for; has swerved to, or for; has rained in a continuous downpour.
swaetsêga - draw in; have cramp.
swafaditse - has caused to become desolate, as a wasted countryside, etc.
swafaditswe - has been made to become desolate, as a wasted countryside, etc.
swafadiwa - as a wasted countryside, etc.
swafala - become desolate, as a wasted countryside; become useless; become nasty, or disagreeable; spoil by becoming old. Swafatsa v.s.caus. < Swafala, same as ntshafatsa, renew; make new.
swafatsa - make desolate; make wasted.
swafetse - has become desolate etc.
swai - Same as swaile a file; a rasp [borrowed].
swaila - etc.; rush through waterless country.
swaile - Same as swai, a file; a rasp [borrowed].
swaisa - cause or help to mince meat that is already cooked.
swaitse - has forced a way through bushes, etc.; has rushed through a waterless or desert land.
swaki - a barrel; a water barrel [borrowed].
swalala - (same as "swaalala"), melt away, or disperse, as clouds, or a crowd.
swalaya - similar to swelêla, work carelessly, or badly; treat a person with dishonour, as a man treats his master badly by bad work; have a dog-in-the-manger spirit with regard to food, etc.
swaleila - has worked carelessly, or badly; has treated a person with dishonour, etc.
swalêlêla - (same as "swêlêla"), go through with work; persevere in doing; follow after.
swaleletse - (same as "sweleletse has gone through with a job").
swaletse - (same as "sweletse melt away"), or disperse.
swanka - similar to kgêngwê, a game played by children with a wild melon and a pointed stick.
swantisa - Sell by auction; same as fantisa.
swantisitse - (same as "fantisitse has sold by auction"),; has auctioned.
swantisiwa - (same as "fantisiwa"), being auctioned; being sold by public auction.
swapoga - be tall or high; grow to be tall in record time; slip out of another's grip; become unfastened, as two ends when the knot is undone very quickly.
swapogêla - tower aloft.
swapogetse - towering aloft on behalf of.
swapogile - has become tall, or high; has slipped out of another's grip; has become unfastened, as two ends when the knot is undone very quickly.
swapola - so as to lengthen; lengthen by stretching; snatch that which someone else was holding.
swapotsê - has pulled or stretched, so as to lengthen; has snatched that which someone else was holding.
swarêga - become thin, similar to 6ta, and bopama.
swaregile - has become thin.
swatlha - as dried grass when something moves in it.
swatlha - (same as "sdtlha"), push a thing in and then shake.
swatlhêla - with a _ Stick, or hand; press down with a stick.
swatlhetsantsê - has thrust in with violence.
swatlhetsanya - thrust in with violence.
swatlhetse - has pressed in, or rammed in, etc., with a stick for.
swatlhile - has pressed in with a stick, or hand.
swatlhisa - (same as "sotlhisa"), cause or help to press in, or ram in.
swatlhisitse - (same as "sotlhisitse"), has caused or helped to press in, or ram in.
swatlhisitswe - (same as "sotlhisitswe"), has been caused to ram in with a hand, or stick.
swatlhisiwa - (same as "swatlhiswa and sotlhisiwa"), being caused to ram in with a hand, or stick.
swatlhiwa - being pressed in with a stick, or hand.
swatoga - break out into a rash, or eruption.
swatogêla - tower above, as a tall man.
swatogetse - be towering above, as a man who is taller than others.
swatogile - has broken out into a rash, or eruption.
swatola - haul; pull towards; pluck out; strip by force.
swatotsê - has hauled; has pulled towards, etc.
swaya - turn a thing in some direction; swerve.
sweditse - (same as "feditse"), has finished; has exhausted. Swêga v.s.NEuT., become strained; re a Swêga mo tirong e re mo go yonê, we are Strained in this job.
swêga pelo - become distressed. Swêga-Swêga v.s. REP. become anxious; be impatient.
swêla - s, pliable; supple.
swêla - die for, or at. PROV., ngwana o sa leleng o swêla tharing. swêla molem6 1p. Expr, similar to sola molemê, be useful; be of benefit; derive benefit from; put to good use.
sweleditse - (same as "feleditse has finished for").
sweleleditse - (same as "feleleditse"), has completed a thing totally.
swêlwa - being bereaved.
sweufaditse - has made white.
sweufaditswe - has been made white.
sweufala - become white; become clear.
sweufatsa - make white.
sweufetse - has become white.
swintsê - has pursed the lips in contempt, or scorn.
swinya - purse the lips in contempt, or scorn.
swiwa - be dying, as in ga bo go swiwa, then death occurred.
