ta - EXPR, making the sound ta means; has hit the mark; being completely finished; the exact point of striking.
taa - a pole or log used for floating a person across a river.
taantsê - (same as "itaantsê"), which is more commonly used, has dashed down; has struck one thing against another.
taanya - which is more commonly used, dash down; strike together or against each other.
taba - a species of river grass.
tabodisa - cause or help to take out a handful.
taboga - run fast.
tabogêla - run after.
tabogile - has run fast; has run.
tabogisa - cause or help to run; induce diarrhoea.
tabogisitse - has caused to run fast.
tabogisiwa - being caused to run fast.
tabola - take out a handful, spoonful, etc.
tabolaka - take out many handfuls spoonfuls, etc.
tabolêga - easy to take out a handful spoonful, etc., from.
tabolêla - share by giving food, etc.
taboletse - has shared by giving food, etc.
tabosa - has caused to take out with hand or spoon.
tabositse - has caused to take out with hand or spoon.
tabotsê - has taken out a handful.
tabutabu - s, soft; easily indented; jellylike.
tadi - a striped field mouse; a striped cat; a tabby cat.
tadi - ExPR, glance.
tadintsê - has looked round or turned the head quickly in doing so.
tadinya - look round or turn the head quickly while doing so.
taêl6 - an instruction; a message given; a charge.
taenamo - dynamo [borrowed].
taêtso - a message.
tafodisa - help to thatch.
tafola - make even grass thatch; smoothen grass thatch.
tafole - (ForR},a table.
tafolêla - smoothen a grass-thatched roof for; thatch for another.
tafoletse - has thatched for.
tafolwa - being thatched.
taga - intoxicate; make drunk.
tagafara - (same as "tagarafa").
tagarafa - and [archaic], Same as tagafana, a summons [borrowed].
tagaraga - ¢-.,edible wild cucumbers.
tagêga - becoming intoxicated.
tagile - has intoxicated.
tagilwe - be intoxicated; be drunk.
tagisa - cause to become drunk.
tagiwa - (same as "tagwa"), begin to be drunk; becoming drunk; being drunk.
tag6 - drunkenness.
tagwa - (same as "tagiwa").
taila - milk a cow dry, similar to kobetsa.
taise - 99-, dice [borrowed].
taitse - similar to kobeditse, has milked a cow dry.
taka - white ay; whiting; chalk.
taka - paint; whitewash; set a table.
takêga - become whitewashed.
takêla - whitewash or paint for.
takile - has whitewashed or painted.
takisa - cause or help to paint or whitewash.
takisitse - has helped to paint etc.; has made white.
takisiwa - being caused or helped to make white or paint.
takiwa - being whitewashed or painted. tala apv. ort, long time ago, often used with bogologolo, e.g. bogologolotala.
tala - s., blue; green.
tala - s., raw; uncouth; not ripe, similar to lekgela.
talafaditse - has made green or blue.
talafala - become green or blue.
talafatsa - make green or blue.
talafetse - has become green or blue.
talama_ - (same as "sebaga"), a bead; a necklace; a button; a stud.
talameiti - 9N-, dynamite [borrowed].
talane - sorghum which was frostbitten before it ripened.
talane - (same as "motokwane"), dagga; euphemistically called motalane.
talane - a species of green finch.
tale - a species of green canary, very destructive to corn.
talêla - despise.
talêlalerole - t.9N-,a bull buffalo which lies in ambush to attack hunters.
talêl6 - N.,an ambush; a lying-in-wait; a stratagem.
taletse - (same as "nyaditse"), has despised.
taletso - a call; an invitation.
talwane - 9N-, Same as telwane and têlwane pubis.
tamalala - (same as "tlhamalala which is commonly used"), be straight.
tamaletse - see tlhamaletse was/is straight.
tamati - tomato [borrowed].
tamilwe - be dammed up.
tammani - 14¢-, gemsbok bean, Febaceae.
tamme - EXxPR, sink instantly in water.
tammeditse - has sunk something in a liquid.
tammediwa - being sunk in a liquid.
tammêla - sinking in a liquid.
tammetsa - cause to sink in a liquid.
tammetse - is sunk or has sunk in a liquid.
tamodisa - help to squeeze.
tamola - squeeze with the hand; drain a cow's udder; pull taut an ox's rein.
tamoletse - has squeezed for.
tamosa - squeeze, as is done to get pus out of a wound.
tamositse - has squeezed.
tamotsê - has squeezed with the hand.
tamu - ExPR, splash!.
tamusa - as matter out of a sore.
tamusitse - has pressed out, as matter from a sore.
tamutamu DER - S,, merry.
tana - ride; used mainly in Sekgatla, a dialect.
tang - tanka_N., tank [borrowed].
tanki - thank (you) [FoR}.
tankisa - express thanks.
tankisitse - has caused to thank; has expressed gratitude.
tanne - has ridden.
tanta - bind many times; bind very tightly.
tantêla - bind around very tightly.
tantetse - has bound very tightly.
tantile - has bound about many times.
tantolola - unbind.
tantolotsê - has unloosened a cord, etc., that was bound tightly.
tantsê - has hit the mark; has made a sound like fa. PRov, o tantsê kgomo lonaka.
tantsêtsêga - be nothing or no one left.
tantsha - similar to katisa, break in; train as an animal.
tantshe - dance [borrowed].
tantshetsa - break in for.
tantshitse - has broken in.
tantshiwa - being broken in.
taê - a precept; a statute; an injunction; an instruction.
tad - a tree, the roots of which are used for making a perfume called bolad.
ta6 - ¢., hortative.
taola - a divining bone; a dice.
taolêl6 - an ordinance; a regulation.
taol6 - a command; commandment; authority; power.
taologa - be stretched; stretch; melt.
taologile - is stretched; has stretched.
taolola - liquify; stretch.
taololêla - stretch for.
taololetse - has stretched for.
taolotsê - has stretched.
tapalala - (same as "t/hamalala"), go straight on without stopping or turning aside.
tapaletse - has gone straight on without stopping or turning aside.
tapeiti - 9-, carpet floormat; linoleum [borrowed].
tapeta - flatten.
tapisêgê - weariness; travail.
tapisê - weariness; fatigue.
tapologêl6 - a resting place.
tapolog6 - a rest; relaxation.
tapolosê - a rest; refreshment.
taputa - pierce; stab.
taputile - has pierced; has stabbed.
taraisa - wind up, as a windlass or as a bucket from a well.
taraisitse - has wound up, as a windlass or as a bucket from a well.
tarata - move up and down.
taratisa - cause to move up and down.
taratisitse - has caused to move up and down.
taratisiwa - being caused to move up and down.
taratiwa - being moved up and down.
taselebêm6 - a yoke-bar [borrowed].
tata - ¢, same as papa, the name by which a child begins to address its father.
tata - prohibit.
tatalala - be contentious; nag; be persistent, as in a dispute; telling false news.
tatalalana - contend, or dispute persistently; nag.
tatalalanê - contention.
tatalalanye - have contended, or disputed persistently.
tatalalê - nagging; contentiousness.
tatamala - and moving at a fast pace.
tatametse - has kept to the road and moved at a fast pace.
tateditse - has forbidden.
tateditswe - (same as "tatetswe has been forbidden").
tatediwa - being forbidden.
tatêla - or debar.
tatêlanê - 9-, custom; etiquette.
tatêlêl6 - sequence.
tatetsa - cause to prohibit, etc.
tatetse - has prohibited; has forbidden.
tatetswe - (same as "tateditswe has been forbidden"), prohibited, or debarred.
tatlhêgê - 9N-, loss; perdition; a castaway.
tatlhê - a casting away.
tatofats6 - < latofatsa, blame.
tatôlêlôê - an epitaph.
tatolê - 99-, denial; a notice of death; an obituary.
tau - a lion.
tautêga - be exhausted; be completely dilapidated.
tautegile - is thoroughly worn out.
tautona COMP - AND N. and ditautona, president.
teatea - be excited; go about in all directions, as an excited person.
teateile - was excited; has gone about in all directions, as an excited person.
teba - go down, as a scale; speak in low tones; deteriorate, as a condition of sickness.
tebagang - similarity of appearance.
tebaganê - (same as "tebagang"), resemblance; similarity of appearance.
tebalebêlê - stewardship.
tebalê - similar to the phrase go lebagana le; resembling one another; right or suitable (time); straight with.
tebang - similar to the phrase go lebagana le; resembling one another; right or suitable (time); straight with.
tebateba - hesitate; be uncertain what to do; beat at an accelerated pace, or palpitate.
tebatebile - has hesitated; was uncertain what to do.
tebêla - strike or knock out with a fist.
tebelaka - strike violently; knock out thoroughly or all over.
tebeledi - 9N-, a night watchman.
tebelegantsê - has torn into pieces; has shredded.
tebeleganya - tear into pieces; shred.
tebelekile - has struck violently.
tebêlêl6 - 9N-, expectation; a wake, or watch beside a corpse before a funeral.
tebêlê - a watch; a guard; a stewardship; similar to tebalebêld.
tebetebe - s, certain or particular.
tebetse - has struck or knocked about with a fist.
tebile - has gone down, as a scale; speak in low tones.
tebisitse - has caused to go down as a scale.
tebisitswe - has been caused to go down, as a scale.
tebisiwa - being made to go down, as a scale.
tebiti - (For), debit.
teb6 - a glance; a gaze.
tebog6 - (same as "malebogo"), a thanksgiving; a recompense; thankfulness.
tedu_ - a beard; a whisker; a moustache. prov. go hupa tedu.
teduputswa - a grey beard.
têêlêl6_ - 90-, ditêêlêl6, naming after.
têêmane - diamond [borrowed].
tefetso - a recompense; a repayment; an avenging.
tefisê - a fine.
tefO - a payment; an expiation.
tege - dough [borrowed].
teisa - cause to go down, as a scale; speak in very low tones.
tekanê - equality; sobriety; temperateness.
tekanyetso - a division.
tekany6 - a measure; a measuring rod.
tekatekan6 - equity; probity; fairness; justice.
teketa - strike; hit all over; bruise.
teketêga - be bruised all over.
teket6 - 9N., a stroke; a bruising, due to being hit all over with fists, Sticks, etc.; an assault.
tek6 - a test; an examination; an effort; a trial.
tekodis6 - 99, a report.
tekol6 - 9N., a visit, in particular one made to the sick.
teku - s., red; ruddy; glowing; red-hot.
tekuteku - very red, etc.
teledimo - 9N., a species of wild tulip (very poisonous); tulip.
têlêk6 - an expulsion. telele api.s., long; tall.
telele - ING. oF ditelele, large intestine.
telenyê - amour.
telê - a cry; a bleat; a ringing; a peal or toll; shout.
têlwane - (same as "têlwane and talwane"), pubis.
tema - a piece of cultivated ground; a furrow made by a plough; an acre; a paragraph; a text.
tema - eat with a spoon.
têmaldê - a habit, or custom; an order; a course.
temana - a text; a verse.
temapolêlêl6_ - €êlêlê newspaper article.
têmêka - shake or be shaky, as a thing not firm or strong.
têmêkanya - shake much.
temekêla - shake for.
temekile - has shaken; was shaken, as a stem that is weak.
temekisa - cause to shake, as a weak stem moved by a breeze.
temekisitse - has caused to shake.
temekisiwa - being caused to shake.
temile - has eaten with a spoon.
tem6 - agriculture; field, or time to work on lands. temofalê profit; goodness; advantage.
temosi - sign.
temos6 - 99, hint; reminder.
temêthuê - 9n., agriculture; mixed farming.
têmpa - Stamp.
têmpêlê - (ror), temple.
tena - tire out; surfeit; disgust; be repugnant to.
tenana - disgust or anger one another.
teneditse - has stolen by putting a thing slyly into the pocket; has tucked in, as a shirt in trousers.
tenêga - be disgusted; get cross; become annoyed.
tenêgêla - get cross with; turn away from; backslide.
tenegetse - be angry with; become annoyed by.
tenegetswe - has been angry with.
tenegile - was angry. tenêg6_N.cL.9N.,a backsliding; a falling back; a State of being tired out.
tenêla - tire out by or with.
tenetsa - put a thing where it will not be seen; steal by putting a thing slyly into the pocket; tuck in; place out of view.
teng - ADV. MAN., there; present; deeply.
tenisa - (same as "tentsha"), cause to disgust.
tenkana - collapsed.
tenkanye - has collapsed.
tenkê - collapsed.
tennê - has become repugnant to or has disgusted.
tennwê - has been disgusted; has been surfeited; has been loathed. tennyanateng apv. or pLa.,very far off; very far back; very far away.
ten6 - a Surfeit.
tenta - run slowly; run with a burden.
tentile - has run slowly; has run with a burden.
tentsha - (same as "tenisa"), cause to turn away from in disgust.
tentshitse - has caused to turn away from in disgust.
tentshiwa - being caused to turn away from in disgust.
tenwa - being tired out; being disgusted, etc.
teofO - a fault; asin; a mistake.
teofololo - an expiation.
teola - ridicule.
teotsê - has ridiculed.
têpê - s. very wet, or watery, used of cooked pumpkin.
tepelêla - become weak, anaemic or watery.
tepeletse - has become weak etc.
tepd-loapi - 9, meteorology.
terama - (FoR), drama.
terapa - pedal.
terata - Wire [borrowed].
terebeditse - has spoken ina loud or shrill voice; trumpet.
terebetsa - speak in a loud or shrill voice; trumpet.
terebole - 9¢, travelling rug [borrowed].
terêkêrê - 9N-, Same as tereketara, tractor.
terêketara - (same as "terêkêrê"), tractor [borrowed].
terêsêlê - 9N-, trestle [borrowed].
teri - dairy [borrowed].
terdk6 - 9¢-, (For, truck.
teroli - trolley [borrowed].
terompeta - trumpet.
terone - throne [borrowed].
teseletsê - (same as "têtlêlêl6"), a permit; permission.
tesimale - decimal [borrowed].
tesolog6 - a hanging down; a swelling, especially in the private parts.
tesololê - a hanging down; a folding of wings, or hands; a letting or putting down.
teta - (of a bull with a sterile cow).
têtê - EXPR, trembling; shivering.
teteêla - contuse; bruise.
teteêl6 - a contusion; a bruise.
teteetse - has bruised.
teterareki - a tetrarch [borrowed].
têtêsêla - êfê, tremble; shiver; quake; be palsied.
têtêsêl6 - ague; palsy; a trembling or shivering fit.
tetile - has copulated freely, as a sterile cow and a bull.
tetilwe - being copulated freely as a Sterile cow and a bull.
tetla - a permit; permission.
tetlanyôê - atonement; a reconciliation; that which causes amity, or mutual love.
tetlêlêl6 - n., a permission; a permit.
tetwa - (of a sterile cow).
têwa - being said; being told. th VOICELESS ALVEOLAR STOP CONSONANT, as in English tap or tape.
tha - ExPR, Striking with a fist, etc.; clapping.
thaakan6 - a point of difference. thaakanya ditsêbê 1p. Expr, be alert; be watchful.
thaba - a mountain; a hill.
thaba - similar to itumêla, be cheerful; rejoice.
thaban6 - a dashing down; a smashing.
thabile - be cheerful, or happy.
thabisa - make cheerful.
thabisitse - has made cheerful.
thabisiwa - is being made cheerful.
thabiwa - being cheerful.
thabu - 1p. exer, falling into a liquid; plunging into water.
thabueditse - has thrown into water.
thabueditswe - has been thrown into water.
thabuediwa - being plunged into water.
thabuêga - fall into, or plunge into water; be thrown into water.
thabuêgêla - êga, has fallen into water for.
thabuegile - has fallen into water.
thabuêla - fall or phinge into water; become plunged.
thabuetsa - cast into water.
thabuetse - has fallen or plunged into water.
thadile - < has drawn a line.
thadisa - < help or cause to draw a line.
thadisitse - has been helped or caused to draw a line.
thadisiwa - being helped to draw a line.
thadis6 - N., outline.
thadiwa - being drawn, i.e. a line.
thaêga - become rounded; be well founded; become set, as a trap or snare.
thaêgêla - êga, become founded on etc.; to facilitate and make normal.
thaegetse - has become founded on, etc.
thaegile - was well founded; is well founded.
thaêla - set a trap for; lay a foundation of a house, etc., for.
thaele - tile [borrowed].
thaêl6 - a temptation.
thaepa - type.
thaepêga - become typed; be typed.
thaepegile - has become typed; is well typed.
thaepêla - type for.
thaeperaetara - 9N., typewriter [borrowed].
thaephine - a tie pin [borrowed].
thaere - 9N-, tyre [borrowed].
thaete - 9N-, tide [borrowed].
thaetlele - {For), title.
thafi_ - 9n-,same as thabe or kgodisa, a hiccup.
thafolê - (same as "thafê"), a taking of a little; a division, as cattle being given water.
thaga - 1Ae- AND 9N-, or dithaga, a red-billed quelea, notorious for eating corn.
thagama - be at peace.
thagame - is at peace.
thagam6 - (same as "thokgamê"), a state of peace; security; quietness.
thai - a tie [borrowed].
thaile - has marked out for a foundation; has laid a foundation; has set a trap or a snare.
thaisa - hear or see anything indistinctly; help or cause a foundation to be laid; lay a snare.
thaisitse - has heard or seen anything indistinctly; has helped or caused a foundation to be laid.
thaisiwa - being ensnared.
thaiwa - being drawn, as an outline; being made, as a foundation.
thaka - and mathaka, a companion; a comrade.
thaka - 9N., the pupil of the eye.
thaka - EXCLAM, expressing surprise wonder, etc.
thakadu - N., ING. oF dithakadu, an ant bear; an anteater, the totem of the Batlokwa.
thakangwaga - (same as "mogakangwaga"), the name is derived from the fact that something ripens before the ripening season; a species of ground plant with edible red fruits used for brewing khadi.
thakan6 - the treatment by traditional medicine of widows and widowers before remarriage.
thakgantsê - has kicked in all directions, as an ox when one leg is held by a thong.
thakganya - throw one's limbs or body in violent effort to get free or escape grasp.
thakgatha - (same as "thakganya").
thakgathile - has kicked in all directions, as an ox when one leg is held by a thong.
thala - scrotum; testis.
thala - draw a line; make a margin.
thalabodiba - 1A, probably species of Corixidae; water boatman; a small insect that is black or brown in colour, a common inhabitant of shallow pools in Africa.
thalaka - 9N., a huge snake such as a python or a boa constrictor.
thalalagae - n., the procession of initiates of the bogwera, coming near the town and then returning to camp.
thalalê - a passing through etc.:.
thalêla - smear a kind of traditional medicine on walls, etc., to prevent witchcraft.
thama - a small shrub having edible beans and root; beetroot.
thama - be too large to enter an opening; be tight, as a close-fitting garment.
thama - flourish, as a person; be happy.
thamaga - s., denoting an ox of mixed colour varying from ginger-brown to chestnut (the colours not being very clearly and distinctly shown). thamagana api.s, denoting a cow of mixed red and white colours; colours varying in range from ginger-brown to chestnut.
thamakala - become vain.
thamaketse - is vain. Thamalakane n. cL. 2a, name of the Okavango River in Botswana.
thamane - (same as "| morama"), an almond or walnut-like plant; an edible bean, fruit of the thama plant.
thamathamisa - bother by asking many questions, or seeking many things; interrogate one.
thamathamisitse - has interrogated; has asked many questions.
thamathamisiwa - being crossquestioned.
thamêla - be too big to go through an opening.
thamêla - be cheerful over; be too straight, or too much, or too strong for.
thametse - be stuck in an opening through which an attempt was being made to pass through.
thamile - is stuck in an opening; has stuck in an opening.
thamile - be happy.
thamê - a neck.
thamogêlwa - êga, be convalescent.
thamuditse - has bitten a soft watery substance.
thamutsêga - become beaten, of a soft watery substance.
thamutsegile - has become beaten, of a soft watery substance.
thanaka - horns made of ay, worn in the dances of the female puberty ceremony dances.
thanana - ¢, a species of jackal.
thankgola - throw out, as the grains when making beer, or a fly in liquid; overthrow authority. 1. Expr, thankgola pusê ka dikgoka to overthrow the government; to overthrow authority.
thankgotsê - has thrown out as the grains when making beer, or a fly in liquid.
thanodi - dictionary.
thanodikgolo - encyclopaedia.
thanolôê - precision; explicitness; translation; interpretation.
thanthanyêga - similar to thathanyêga, fly about, as sparks; crackle, as burning thorns under a pot.
thanthanyêgêla - as sparks, at or to.
thanthanyegile - as sparks.
thanthanyêgê - a cracking sound.
thanthologa - become unravelled; be unwound, as a spiral spring.
thanthologêla - unwind for.
thanthologile - be unwound; has unravelled; has unwound.
thantholola - unpick stitches; unwind.
thantsê - has woken out of sleep; is fully awake; crack.
thantsetsegile - has become thoroughly awake.
thantsha - make to crack; crack a whip.
thantsha - stimulate; revive; make a person wake up; loosen a knot.
thantsheditse - has cracked a whip for.
thantshetsa - crack a whip for.
thantshitse - has made to crack; has awakened someone.
thantshiwa - being made to crack; being awakened.
thanya - crack, as maize when roasting; wake out of sleep.
thanyd - a cracking noise; an awakening.
thaopa - recruit; engage on a job.
thapa - hire; engage a person to work.
thapama - No SING, afternoon.
thapam6 - a lying down.
thapêla - hire for.
thapêlêl6 - 9n-, a supplication; intercessory prayer.
thapêlê - and merapêlê a prayer.
thapêlwa - being hired for.
thapetse - has hired for.
thapholola - as a blanket.
thapholotsê - has stretched out, as a blanket.
thap6 - a stone or pip of fruit or a berry; a stalk of a vine; a stalk of a plant of the melon ass; a band; a cord; a string of any kind; a rope; a tying up of any kind; a kernel of stone fruit.
thapodisa - pull hard ona thong that is fixed to something.
thapodisitse - has pulled hard on a thong that is fixed to something.
thapoga - become broken or snapped, as a stretched thong, or a coiled spring.
thapogile - broken or snapped as a stretched thong; has broken or snapped, as a stretched thong.
thapotsê - has broken a stretched thong.
thara - a species of creeping plant found in reeds and bushes.
tharabololê - an explanation; a reason; a resolution of a problem; conjugation.
tharanôê - perplexity; entanglement.
thari - a cradle; a skin, or oth worn on the back for carrying an infant in; placenta. prov. ngwana o sa leleng o swêla tharing.
tharo - s., same as raro, three.
thata - strength; power; hardness.
thata - ADV. OF MAN., much; plentifully.
thatafaditse - has strengthened; has made hard.
thatafadiwa - being strengthened, etc.
thatafala - become strong; become hardened.
thatafatsa - strengthen; make hard.
thatafologa - lose strength; become weak.
thatafologile - has lost strength; has become weak.
thatafolola - weaken or lessen strength.
thatafolotsê - has taken away strength; has weakened, etc.
thataro - s,same as rataro and tshelêla, six tab. p. xvii.
thatêgê - loveableness.
thatha - wind, as cotton onto a reel.
thathamologa - become undone, as a woollen garment, similar to thathologêlwa.
thathamologêlwa - regain consciousness as one who had fainted.
thathamologetswe - as one who had fainted.
thathamologile - has become undone, as woollen garment.
thathanya - crackle; grind the teeth.
thathanyana - (same as "thathanya").
thathanyêga - have severe shooting pains; fly out, as sparks, as in thanthanyêga.
thathanyegile - is very tender, etc.; have flown out, as sparks.
thathaulana - fight with each other, as dogs; fight and tear each other.
thathaulanye - have fought with each other, as dogs, etc.
thathêla - wind for, as cotton on a reel.
thathêlêla - êla, wind onto, as thread onto its reel; wind onto, again and again.
thatheletse - has wound for as a thread of cotton on a reel; has wound onto, as thread onto a reel.
thathile - has wound, as a thread of cotton on a reel; has coiled or wrapped closely.
thathisa - cause or help to wind, as cotton on a reel.
thatholêl6 - 9n., a large pot, or vat.
thatholodisa - help or cause to unwind, as cotton from a reel.
thathologê - become unwound; be unwound.
thatholola - unwind, as cotton from a Teel.
thatholotsê - has unwound as cotton from a reel.
thatla - ING. oF dithatla, violent contention or altercation.
that - desire; lust.
thatolola - unwind, as cotton from a reel.
thatsane - (same as "lethatsane"), a plover.
thaya - (same as "theya"), which is less frequently used, found; lay a foundation; make a beginning, etc.
thebana - help each other.
thebelo - little bag.
thebetha - beat, as the heart.
thebola - or make an offering at the grave of an ancestor.
thebolê - an offering, or sacrifice, made at the grave of an ancestor.
thebotsê - has offered a a sacrifice.
thedile - (same as "tshetse"), has poured.
thedimog6 - brightness as of a countenance; a slight shining; impermeability of a surface coated with oil.
thêêkedisa - (same as "thetheekedisa"), cause to stagger, reel, or waver.
theekedisitse - (same as "thetheekeditse"), has caused to stagger.
thêêkedisiwa - (same as "thetheekedisiwa"), being caused to reel.
theekeditse - (same as "thetheekeditse"), has caused to stagger, reel, etc.
thêêkêla - walk unsteadily.
thêêkêla - (same as "thêthêêkêla"), stagger; reel; roll from side to side; waver.
theekeleditse - (same as "thekeleditse"), has fortified; has fenced; has enclosed.
thêêkeletsa - (same as "thekeletsa"), fortify; fence; wall round; enclose in a fence.
thêêkêl6 - 9n.,a Staggering; a reeling; a wavering.
theeketsa - (same as "thetheeketsa"), cause to stagger, or reel, etc.
theeketse - has staggered reeled or rolled from side to side, etc.
theeketso - a staggering; a reeling.
theetso - a hearkening; a listening.
thefotsany6 - (same as "thefosand"), a following in succession or going out one after another at short intervals.
theile - (same as "thaile"), has founded.
theilwe - (same as "thailwe"), has been founded.
theipi - 9N., tape.
thêkalanê - barter; exchange.
thêkêgêl6 - favour; partiality.
thêkêl6 - merchandise.
thekethe - a ticket [borrowed].
thêkgwê - 9N-, testis.
thekisêg6 - trouble; travail.
thekisi - 9N-, a taxi [borrowed].
thêk6 - a purchase; a purchase price.
theko - the end or grasping part of a spear, knobkerrie, etc.; a horseshoe formation by a group of people hunting, etc.
thekêkhirê - 9¢-, dithekêkhirê, hire purchase.
thekolol6 - 9N-, a ransom; a redemption.
thêla - pour; bury skins in damp earth; spread (as an infectious disease). thêla lošalaba tm. pur, cheer.
thêlana - infect one another.
thele - an udder; a ball; a globe; a ball of hair found in an animal's stomach.
thelebišene - television [borrowed].
theledi - 9N., the kneecap of a human being; the flesh at the junction of the bones in an animal's hind legs.
theledisa - cause to dodge and escape and hence survive.
theledisitse - has caused to escape by dodging.
thelefoune - telephone [borrowed].
thêlêgêla - infect; spill over; flow into.
thêlêgêla - similar to tshêlêgêla pour upon, as a cloud of arrows; rush upon; arrive in large numbers.
thelegetse - similar to tshelegetse, has rushed upon, etc. is buried.
thêlêkerafo - |For} telegraph.
thêlêkeramo - N., [FoR telegram.
thêlêla - similar to tshêlêla, escape or survive; pour for.
thêlêla - similar to tshêlêla, bury. thelesa _v.s. simp. supply or give food; entertain by giving food; be hospitable.
theleseditse - has given food to; has assisted with food; has offered hospitality.
theleseditswe - has been given food to.
thelesediwa - being given food; being offered a thing with hospitality.
thelesetsantsê - have given food to one another.
thelesetsanya - (same as "thelesetsana"), entertain one another; offer hospitality.
thelesetso - hospitality; a gift of food.
thelesitse - has set free.
thelesitswe - be set free.
thelesê - hospitality; entertainment.
theletse - (same as "tsheletse"), has poured for.
thelewe - 9N-, same as thele an udder; a ball.
thelê - a pouring; a mould for molten metal, etc.
theloga - become unearthed.
thelola - uncover that which was buried; take skins, etc., out of the ground where they have been put to soften, same as thelolola.
thelolola - (same as "thelola").
thelotsê - has taken skins, etc. out of the ground where they have been put to soften.
thêma - use big words.
thêmana - use big words when speaking to each other.
thêmê - 9N-, (ror), big word; a term or period of time.
themelekana - escape by slipping to one side.
themelekanye - has dodged.
themetse - has used bombastic language against.
themile - has used bombastic language.
themisa - cause (one) to use bombastic language.
themisane - milk still in process of turning sour.
thêmê6 - something cut down, as trees.
themolala - siING. oF dithemolala, quarrel.
themperetšha - temperature [borrowed].
theneka - to sway the hips when walking.
thenekeditse - has swallowed without much chewing.
theneketsa - swallow without much chewing.
theneketse - has swayed the hips for.
thenekisa - cause the hips to sway.
thenekisitse - has caused the hips to sway this way and the other.
thenekisiwa - being caused to sway, as the hips.
thenekiwa - being swayed, as the hips.
thênêsê - 9n., tennis [borrowed].
thentsê - has butted, as a calf when suckling.
thenya - butt, as a calf when suckling; knock a goat's udder with the hand when milking.
thenyeditse - has butted, as a calf when suckling, for.
thenyegile - was successfully induced to give more milk by the process of knocking the udder.
thenyetsa - knock a goat's udder with the hand when milking.
theo - as a pot on the fire; of branching suddenly from the path.
theoga - turn aside from, as a river from its bed; deviate from a certain course; swerve; turn; turn over and spill.
theogêla - resume work.
theogêla - swerve for; decline a certain course for, etc.
theogetse - has declined a certain course.
theogile - has overturned, as a pot; has declined a certain course.
theola - turn aside; overturn; turn in another direction; cause to swerve, divert.
theolêla - divert to, etc.
theoletse - has diverted to.
theotsê - has diverted, etc.
thêpê - ¢, dithêpê |For), tap.
thepe - and bothepe cockscomb; a species of vegetable, used as a relish; Amarantus thunbergii; Amaranthus hybridus.
thepe ya noka - (same as "fswii"), water lily.
theregisO - dreadfulness; fearfulness; horror.
thêrêg6 - 9N-, fear; dread; terror.
thêrêkêl6 - shakiness of gait.
thêrêpana - (same as "tlêrêpana"), become old and worn-out.
thêrêpanye - (same as "tlêrêpanye"), be old and worn-out.
thêrêpê - (same as "flêrêpê"), an old and worn-out gadget, machine or vehicle.
thêrêsê - terrace [borrowed].
theris6 - a terror [borrowed].
thêr6 - a discussion about marriage, or other arrangements, same as morêrd, a Sermon; a homily.
thêrwana - a homily.
thetha - make a large fire; be vain.
thethe - a thick white edible grub found in kraals and rotten wood.
thethebaditse - has satisfied.
thethebadiwa - being satisfied.
thethebala - be contented; be satisfied of heart or mind.
thethebatsa - satisfy; please. thethebatsa pelo 1p. HR, be soothing and hence satisfying to the heart.
thethebetse - is contented; has become contented, satisfied, etc.
thêthêêkêla - move with an uneven gait; walk with weak, unsteady steps.
thethelela - (same as "balabala"), speak too much; talk a great deal.
thetheletse - has spoken too much; has talked a great deal.
thetlwa_ - COLL. a berry of the brandy bush, or Gravia flava.
thi - of people swelling into a big crowd instantly.
thiba - turn the course of anything; stop or turn back; obstruct or shut; seal a leak.
thibala - become obstructed; become stopped, or closed; become eclipsed, as the sun or moon.
thibal6 - N., an obstruction; an eclipse.
thibanê - chest weakness.
thibedi - a notch cut ina yoke skey; an obstruction or a barrier.
thibêga - become turned from following a course; be obstructed, or shut.
thibegetso - 9N-, an overturning, or overthrowing; a turning upside down.
thibêg6 - a native custom wherein a woman lies on her face to be traditionally eansed after the death of her husband.
thibêla - ose an aperture for.
thibêlêla - thibêla, prevent; immunise.
thibêlêla - camp; make a new settlement.
thibetse - has prevented someone from doing; has stopped, closed, or sealed; has obstructed.
thibetswe - has been prevented from doing something; has been stopped or closed.
thibile - etc. iD.EXPR, marua thibile, danger lurks.
thibisa - cause or help to seal an aperture, etc.
thibisitse - has caused to seal.
thibisitswe - has been helped to seal; has been caused or helped to stop or close.
thibisiwa - being caused to seal.
thibiwa - being sealed.
thiboga - move out of the way; give way; keep away; steer clear; avoid.
thibogêla - move out of the way of someone, or something.
thibogile - has moved out of the way.
thibogiwa - moving out of the way.
thibolola - unstop; uncork; pull out a plug; unlock; open.
thibolotsê - has unstopped; has pulled out a plug.
thibosa - cause to move out of the way; snatch a thing out of the way, or to one side.
thiboseditse - has caused to move out of the way of, or for.
thibosetsa - cause to move out of the way of, or for.
thibositse - has moved a thing so as to make room.
thibositswe - has been moved so as to make room.
thibosiwa - (same as "thiboswa being caused or helped to move out of the way").
thimo - of turning oneself suddenly back.
thimogile - has turned oneself back suddenly.
thini ya tsêbê - the back of the ear; the eardrum.
thintsê - has changed the mind; has abandoned an intention; has deferred.
thintsha - alter, or postpone.
thintshitse - has altered, or postponed.
thintswê - has been changed, as a decision previously taken; unable to accomplish or compelled to abandon an enterprise.
thinya - 's intention for a good reason; change one's mind for sufficient cause, or postpone.
thipa - a knife. prov mmangwana o tshwara thipa ka fa bogaleng.
thiri - 9N., a single hair (of the head).
thitê - 9N., new ground for ploughing. prov., molema thite ga se mhodi.
thithetswana - a mythical animal.
thithintsh6 - 9¢-, rehearsal.
thithofaditse - (same as "thutafaditse"), has made warm, or hot.
thithofadiwa - (same as "thutafadiwa"), being made warm, or hot; being warmed.
thithofala - (same as "thuthafala"), become warm, or hot.
thithofatsa - (same as "thutafatsa"), warm; heat.
thithofetse - (same as "thutafetse"), has become warm.
thitê - a mash; a well-stirredup mash of meat.
thitê - the trunk of a tree; the lower end of the trunk of a tree; the part of a tree next to the ground; stubble of maize stalk.
thitomodi - 9¢-, rhizome.
thoba - N., a teat; an opening in a teat, or nipple; an opening in the sky.
thêbalanê - sleep; sexual intercourse.
thobana - primiparous woman.
thobane - a stick; a cudgel.
thobê - the edible fruit of the morobê tree, or puzzle tree.
thêbêga - traditional medicine used for.
thêbêg6 - a fracture.
thêbêla - similar to ngwêgêla break in; rush into; foment.
thobeleditse - has cried out loudly.
thêbêsêlêla - thêba, break in upon; intrude upon a party when not wanted; break through and through.
thobeseletse - has broken in upon, etc.
thobetse - has broken in; has fomented; has broken through and escaped from.
thôb6 - a harvest; a breaking off.
thobogile - has flowed freely.
thobokwê - ¢, a species of wild melon.
thobola - t.9n-,a plug for the bottom of a milk sack; open wide; pull out a plug from the bottom of a milk sack.
thobolêla - open wide for.
thoboletse - has opened wide for.
thobolola - suck; trickle through; pioneer.
thobolotsê - has sucked; has pioneered.
thobu - fallow ground; ground ploughed.
thobu - exclamation for fall.
thobudile - has made a deep loud noise, as with voice or horn.
thobueditse - has plunged into the water with a splash.
thobueditswe - has been plunged into the water with a splash.
thobuêla - fall into the water with a splash; plunge into the water with a splash.
thobuetsa - put into the water with a splash; thrown into the water with a splash.
thobuetse - has fallen into the water with a splash.
thobuetswa - (same as "thobuediwa"), being plunged into the water with a splash.
thobuka - make a deep, loud noise, as with voice, or horn.
thobukile - same-as thobudile, has made a deep, loud noise, as with a voice, or horn.
thobula - (same as "thobuka"), make a deep loud noise, as with voice or horn.
thodi - 9N-., DIAL. VAR. OF fodi, same as thudi string made from chewed bark; wick of a candle or lamp.
thogakan6 - a cursing; a recrimination.
thogakôê - a curse.
thog6 - a cursing; a curse. thog6 ya kgwedi 1. pur, the change of the moon; the appearance of a new moon.
thogomosi - 9N-, a pillar of smoke.
thogwe - a species of aloe with serrated leaves, growing chiefly in limestone.
thêjana - a dance continued all night round a large fire at the ose of the female puberty ceremony.
thojana - ¢., hillock.
thokame - lain or basked by the fire.
thokamêla - lie or sit so as to warm oneself; be exposed to the blaze of a fire.
thokametse - has sat so as to warm oneself.
thokgame - is upright.
thokgamisa - make upright, as a plumb line; make plumb.
thokgamisitse - has made upright, as a plumb line.
thokgamisiwa - being made upright, as a plumb line.
thokgamis6 - a making plumb.
thokgam6 - uprightness; integrity.
thokgosêditse - has shaken the hand, or arm.
thokgosêla - quiver, as a flying arrow.
thêkgêsetsa - cause to quiver, etc.
thokgosetse - has caused to quiver, as a flying arrow.
thôk6 - 9n., dried discharge from eyes.
thok6 - ING. oF dithokê, an awl, or long needle without an eye. thoko apv.s., place aside; at one side.
thôkôlê - n., sina. oF dithôkôl6, dung of buck sheep, hare, etc. m.ExpR, go raga thokêlo.
thokolosi - similar to matholwane, a mysterious being; mischievous elf, or dwarf believed to bring fortune or misfortune [borrowed].
thokoseditse - has shaken up; has rubbed between the hands, as a stick when kindling fire in the traditional way.
thokosetsa - shake up; rub between the hands, as a stick when kindling fire in the traditional way.
thokotswane - the last drops of milk from a cow.
thokwa - s,, refers to male cattle, horses, etc., that are dark brown, near chocolate in colour.
thokwana - s, refers to female cattle, horses, etc., that are dark brown, near chocolate in colour.
thola - (same as "thontholwana"), fruit of the morola bush; first natural motion of a child; meconium; Solanum incanum used as a medicine. prov.,o se bênê thola borethe, teng ga yonê go a baba.
tholana - fruit or berry of the small morola bush; Solanum kwebense and Solanum panduriforme.
thôl6 - a kudu.
thol6 - a taking of something from the head.
thologa - becoming spilled; become upset.
thologêla - êla, be spilled on; rush to.
thologetse - (same as "tshologetse"), has rushed to.
thologile - (same as "tshologile has become spilled").
tholola - (same as "tsholola"), spill; upset; have diarrhoea.
thololêla - spill for.
thololê - a spill; an upset.
thololwa - (same as "tsholwana being spilled"),; being upset.
tholotsê - (same as "tsholotsê"), has spilled.
tholotswê - has been spilled; has been dismissed, as a case before a court of law, but on weak grounds.
tholwana_ - similar to morola, same as tholwane, belladonna plant, Solanum kwebense. prov., tholwana tsa morolo o montsi, masi di a tlhakanêla tshelong.
tholwane - (same as "tholwana").
thoma - wild onion; a scented medicinal shrub.
thomeleditse - has cried out loudly.
thomeletsa - cry out loudly, or louder than others; wail.
thomeletso - from thomeletsa, a cry of oppression; a wail.
thomêlê - an errand.
thom6 - N., a mission; mandate.
thonono - gonorrhoea.
thonop6 - a gleaning.
thopa - take by force; subjugate.
thopafala - become plundered or taken by force.
thopafetse - has become plundered or taken by force.
thopetse - has plundered for.
thopile - has plundered.
thopisa - cause or help to plunder.
thopisitse - has caused to plunder.
thopisiwa - being caused to plunder.
thopiwa - (same as "thotšwa"), being plundered; being taken by force.
thop6 - a spoil; a prey.
thorobo - sparrow.
thorom6 - a trembling; an earth tremor; shiver; rigor.
thoromê ya lefatshe - an earthquake.
thorungwê - a species of grass growing in black ground.
thosola - (same as "matsabane"), early infectious syphilis.
thota - a mound of earth; a small hill; high land or rising ground.
thêthê - 1p. Expr, of pouring a tiny bit into.
thotheditse - has poured drops into.
thothediwa - (same as "thothetswa"), being poured, as drops.
thothetsa - pour a bit; pour drops; micturate.
thothi - 9N-, a small quantity of a liquid; a remnant; a drop of any liquid.
thothobolo - similar to kgatlampi, a mound; a dumping ground; a dune. prov., kgosi thotobolo e 6lêlwa matlakala.
thêthêmêla - similar to tôtômêla, beat down upon, as the rays of the sun; come straight down on; enter or pierce, as a spear in the ground.
thothometse - has come straight down on.
thoto - goods; possessions; merchandise.
thêtsê - seed of the melon; last scab that peels off when a wound is well healed.
thotšwa - (same as "thopiwa"), being abducted. a.
thuany6 - a propitiation; an atonement.
thuba - break through; break out and run away; foment; break to pieces, as a flat stone, etc.; break down; rush, as a crowd; come off a nest with chickens.
thuba lobelê 1 - PHR, run a race; run fast.
thubagana - break; smash or split; dash to pieces.
thubaganngwa - be broken into pieces.
thubagantsê - has cracked; has smashed up.
thubagantswê - was broken into pieces; has been smashed to pieces.
thubaganye - is cracked; is smashed.
thubaka - damage extensively.
thubakantsê - has damaged extensively.
thubakanya - break up completely; smash.
thubakany6 - violence. DIAL. VAR. OF thubakêg6.
thubakêg6 - violence. DIAL. VAR. OF thubanyê.
thubalaka - (same as "thubakaka"), break into smithereens.
thubantsê - has smitten.
thubanya - smite.
thubeditse - (same as "beteletse has raped").
thubêga - become broken; break.
thubêgêla - êga, rush together; rush with one accord, as a crowd.
thubegetse - have rushed together.
thubêgile - is broken.
thubêgôê - a breach.
thubêla - run, or rush towards; break something.
thubêlêla - strike down with an evil intent, as of committing rape.
thubetsa - same as betêlêla, rape.
thubetse - has rushed towards a thing; has broken something.
thudi - a hut.
thudile - has beaten or knocked; has hammered; has gored.
thudisêg6 - -, siING:oF dithudisêg6, revival.
thudis6 - a revival.
thue - (same as "nthue elephant shrew").
thuêl6 - an inherited place; a land possession.
thuf6 - payment for garden work.
thufudile - has turned away the head and refused to listen.
thufula - turn away the head and refuse to listen.
thufulêla - turn away from a person.
thufuletse - has turned one's back to a person.
thuga - (same as "setla and similar to sila beat with a staff"),; break with a stone held in the hand; pound; bruise.
thugêga - become pounded; be pounded well.
thugêla - pound for.
thugile - has pounded; has broken with a stone held in the hand.
thukhutha - as the head; shake the head; rob.
thukhuthêla - rob for.
thukhuthile - has robbed.
thukhuthisa - cause or help to rob.
thukhuthiwa - (same as "thukhuthwa being deprived of"), or robbed.
thukhuthwa - (same as "thukhuthiwa").
thukhut6 - 9., robbery.
thukhwi - 149-, an aardwolf, same as mmabudu, a small hyenalike animal. prov, thukhwi o rile ke lobelê, marota a re ke namile.
thukuthaka - rob extensively.
thukuthêga - be robbed; become robbed.
thula - gore, or butt, as a goat; hammer as a smith; beat, or knock one thing against another.
thulagany6 - 9N., same as lenaned, an order; an ordering; an arrangement; a programme, or agenda.
thulaganyê-letsholê - -, birth control.
thulagany6-lwapa - family planning.
thulaka - as a goat; hammer much, as a smith; knock against all and sundry.
thulakana - knock together much, or many times.
thulakanê - a chain of collisions.
thulakantsê - has caused to gore, or butt extensively.
thulakanya - cause to gore, or butt at each other much.
thulakanye - has knocked together.
thulakêma - (same as "thulakomê and kgori wild turkey"),; bustard.
thulama - as a pot; tilted, as a descent; slope.
thulame - is lopsided, as a pot; is tilted, as a descent.
thulameditse - has put into a deep sleep; has anaesthetised.
thulameditswe - has been put into a deep sleep.
thulamediwa - being put into a deep sleep; being anaesthetised.
thulamêla - fall asleep; sleep deeply; become fast asleep; tilt towards, as a descent.
thulamêlê - sound sleep; a deep sleep.
thulametsa - put into a deep sleep; anaesthetise.
thulamisa - as a pot; tilt.
thulamisitse - similar to sekamisitse, has made unlevel; place on its side, as a pot that is not in use; has tilted or slanted.
thulamiswa - being made level; place on one side, as a pot.
thulamiwa - being lopsided, as a pot.
thulana - come into collision; collide.
thulantsê - has caused to come into collision; has caused to collide.
thulanya - bring about a collision; cause or help to knock against each other.
thulanye - have collided.
thulêga - hold upside down; overthrow; overturn; subvert; give enema; be hammered, or pressed into new shapes.
thulêgêla - give an enema for.
thulegile - has given an enema.
thulegisa - cause or help to give an enema.
thulegisitse - has caused or helped to subvert.
thulegiwa - being held upside down; being given an enema.
thulêgê - turn upside down.
thulêla - castrate sheep and goats by bruising the testicles; repair for; hammer for, or at.
thuletse - has castrated sheep etc., by bruising the testicles; has repaired for.
thulola - take the lead; turn away and take a different direction.
thulotsê - has taken thê lead; has turned away and taken a different direction.
thuma - (same as "Sapa"), grind very fine; swim.
thumêla - swim for, or at.
thumile - has ground very fine; has swum.
thumisa - cause or help to swim.
thumisitse - has caused or helped to swim.
thumisiwa - being caused or helped to swim.
thumiwa - being swum.
thumoditse - has milked into the mouth.
thumolêg6 - 9N-,a sense of being wronged offended, or vexed.
thumolê - irritation; offence; vexation.
thumotsa - milk into the mouth.
thuntsê - has become pale; has faded, as cloth; has become discoloured; has gone grey, as hair; has exploded; has burst, as a bubble.
thuntsha - cause to explode; fire a gun, etc.; shoot at.
thuntshana - fire at one another.
thuntsheditswe - has been fired at, or for.
thuntshediwa - being fired at for a purpose.
thuntshetsa - fire at for; make faded, or discoloured for.
thunya - fire; explode; burst, as a balloon, etc.; blossom; come into view; ache; fade as colours or sound.
thunyana - (same as "thuntshana"), fire at each other.
thunyeditse - exploded for, or at.
thunyeditswe - has been discoloured; has been a victim of an explosion.
thunyediwa - (same as "thunyetswa"), being dirty, as one who has been working in dusty surroundings; being discoloured.
thunyetsa - explode at, or for.
thud - an inheritance; a possession.
thupa - a switch; a rod; a thin stick; a riding whip or stroke with a rod. prov., tlogatloga e tloga galê modisa wa kgomo o bolola nayê thupa ya dikgomo, re e kgetla di eme.
thupis6 - a rcumcision.
thup6 - a rcumcision; an initiation.
thura - hot ashes without nders, similar to kupa.
thurugê - (same as "borurugê"), a swelling.
thusa - help; treat seed with traditional medicine to make it more productive; make cattle more virile.
thusantsê - have helped each other.
thusanya - help each other.
thuseditse - has helped for.
thuseditswe - has been helped for.
thusediwa - being helped for.
thusêga - becoming helped; become fortunate; become helped.
thusêgêla - êga, be helped for; be rescued.
thusegile - has become helped.
thusetsa - save; rescue.
thusitse - has helped; has rescued.
thusitswe - has been helped; has been rescued.
thus6 - help; grant in aid; an aid.
thusula_ - (same as "thosola and matsabane"), syphilis.
thutadimela - 9-, botany.
thutafaditse - has made warm.
thutafadiwa - being made warm.
thutafala - become warm.
thutafal6 - warmth.
thutafatsa - warm.
thutafatsana - warm each other.
thutafetse - is warm.
thutamolaê - legal professor.
thutatshelo - biology.
thutêl6 - (DJ, teaching; the effects of teaching.
thuthuntshwane - 9N-, same as thutuntshwane, a fungus; a mushroom. thutlwa_N. a giraffe or camelopard; chicken pox; water pox; the constellation of the Southern Cross.
thut6 - a teaching; a doctrine; education.
thutubudu - (same as "thotobolo"), rubbish heap. prov. kgosi thotobolo e 6lêlwa matlakala.
thuula - lead, or pull, as a person by an arm or a dog by a chain or rope.
thuulola - take the lead; turn away and take a different direction.
thuulotsê - (same as "thulotsê"), has lead, or pulled, as a person by an arm, or a dog by a chain or rope.
thwadi - a leader; an odd number; a superior or one more prominent.
than another - go ipaya thwadi, put oneself into the foreground, or the limelight.
thwala - find a thing and keep it, not knowing its owner.
thwane - a lynx; a red cat.
thwantsê - has cracked, as a whip; make a cracking sound.
thwanya - crack, as a whip; make a cracking sound.
thwanye - fruit of a species of wild fig.
thwetse - has found a thing and kept it, not knowing its owner.
tiba - stamp with the foot; thump; beat the ground with the tail, as an ox lying down and hence said to be of evil omen; throb; boom, as a gun; rumble, as distant thunder.
tibaka - stamp the ground very hard, etc.
tibê - ¢., a wild cat.
tibêla - as distant thunder.
tibê - a round hole cut for a patch.
tibola - be the firstborn. w.Expr, tibola lotha, firstborn.
tibolalotha - 9., firstborn.
tibotsê - is firstborn.
tidikêla - keep back the truth from.
tidikêla loleme - speak with a slippery tongue.
tidiketse - has prevaricated.
tidikile - has kept back the truth.
tidile - has avoided. tidima_N.CL.9N., sING. OF ditidima, a shallow valley; a piece of meadow land between hills suitable for arable purposes.
tidimal6 - 9N-, silence.
tidisa - cause to avoid.
tidisitse - has caused to avoid.
tidisitswe - has been caused to avoid; has been immunised, or innoculated against.
tidisiwa - has caused to avoid.
tidd - (DJ, same as thitd, the trunk of a tree.
tiêgd - a delay.
tigêl6 - the conclusion of a speech; the osing phrases of an argument.
tig - a casting down.
tihahal6 - DIAL. vaR. oF tirahald, DIAL. VAR. OF tiragald, same as tihald, an event; an experience. tihalê DIAL. vaR. oF firahald, an event; an experience. tihats6 DIAL. vAR oF firahatsê, a fulfilment. tihêl6 DIAL. vaR. oF firêl6, a service; ministry. tihd DIAL. VAR. oF fird, a task; employment.
tile - make firm or fast; fix in position.
tiisa - cause to be firm, or fixed; make firm, or fast; fix in position. 1D. Expr, go tiisa moko.
tiisetsO - basis.
tiisitse - has strengthened.
tiisiwa - being caused to be firm; being strengthened.
tika - (same as "kKonopa and similar to fula throw"),; aim or point, as a gun; fire or shoot with a gun.
tikana - throw at one another.
tikatikê - delay.
tikêla - hide behind.
tiketse - has thrown for, or at; has disappeared from view.
tikisi - 99-, radius.
tikologê - 9N-, a rcuit; an environment; a revolution, as of a wheel.
tikologong - DER F.tikologêd, round about.
tila - duck; dodge.
tilana - avoid each other.
tilane - 9N-, the dung of a new-born calf, lamb, etc.; stools of newly born lambs or calves; meconium.
tilatshi - 9N-, the horny knob above an ox's hoof at the back; the fetlock.
tilêla - avoid for.
tileng - ¢, [ops.j,same as mosupi, a witness.
tiletse - has avoided for a reason.
tilodi - s., spotted black and white; mostly black, with a few white spots about the belly; NB. a colour description of a male animal such as an ox,; leopard.
tilolê - a scowl; a frown.
tilotsana - s, spotted black and white cow, or goat.
tilwane - 9N-, a thick bead ring woven on cord.
tilwe - has been said.
tima - become extinguished; go out, as a fire or a candle; cover the ground, as springing corn; stint; begrudge; deprive of; withhold from; dilute; make less sharp to the taste.
timana - be stingy, or close-fisted; withhold from one another.
timane - (same as "timanye begrudged").
timan6 - stinginess.
timanye - has begrudged.
timê - sudden disappearance.
timeditse - has caused to wander, or to go astray or away; has failed to bring cattle, sheep, etc., back to the fold at the end of the day.
timediwa - (same as "timetswa being led astray"),; being caused to go astray; being cause to wander.
timêga - become extinguished; be extinguishable.
timegeditse - has fallen, as a meteor.
timegetsa - fall, as a meteor; light up the sky, as a falling star; reveal.
timêla - v.s. APPL, wander; go astray; begrudge for.
timeleditse - has caused to wander from.
timelediwa - being caused to stray.
timêlêla - disappear.
timeletsa - cause to wander or go astray.
timeletsane - a cormorant.
timeletse - has wandered or strayed; has disappeared from view.
timêl6 - 9N-, a wandering; a going astray.
timêlwa - being left in darkness through a light having gone off.
timetsa - cause to go astray; cause to wander; let domestic animals stray.
timetse - has gone astray; has wandered.
timetswa - has been caused to go astray; has been caused to wander.
timile - has gone out, like a candle or fire; has begrudged; has denied someone a thing desired.
timisa - stinted; cause to be stinted; help or cause to put out a fire, light etc.; help or cause to extinguish; cause someone to be denied something cherished.
timisitse - has caused to be stinted; has helped or caused to put out a light, fire, etc.
timisitswe - has been caused to be stung; has been helped or made to put out a light, a fire, etc.
timisiwa - being caused to be stinted.
timiwa - (same as "tingwa"), being stinted; being denied something.
timokany6 - giddiness; dizziness; a stupor.
timola - allay; diminish; timola bogale allay anger; timola bojalwa, dilute beer.
timolêla - allay for; dilute for.
timoletse - has allayed for; has diluted for.
timoletswe - has been allayed for; has been diluted for; has been cooled for.
timotsê - has allayed; has diminished.
timpala - ¢., go in a straight line, go kgona.
timpala - have abdominal distension.
ting - 9N., sour, fermented porridge, similar to sekwane. prov., motlhodi wa motho o gaisa wa ting.
tingwa - (same as "timiwa"), being stinted; being extinguished.
tinêrê - 9N-, tenor [borrowed].
tinta - run with elbows drawn into the side and body swaying.
tintibane - 14, one of the demi-gods of the Batswana, the god by whom they take the oath, wetting the forefinger of the right hand and holding it above the head, ke ikana ka tintibane, or tintibane a lefatshe.
tiori - 9N-, theory [borrowed].
tipi - (FoR), dip.
tipo - 1D, striking a hard blow.
tipola - (same as "thipola"), cut or sever with one cut; deal a blow on the torso.
tipotsê - (same as "thipotsê"), has cut or severed with one cut.
tira - simple form of the verb stem; neologism.
tirafalê - an event; an experience.
tiralê - (same as "tirafald an event"),; a happening; an occurrence.
tiratsê - a fulfilment.
tirêlê - a service; a ministry.
tirila - drill.
tirisanê - a co-operation.
tirêd - an occupation; employment.
tirwa - passive voice.
tis - a herding; a watch; protection.
tita - withhold an opinion.
titamere - the flesh on the side of a bull's neck.
titamôê - (same as "tshiamd"), righteousness.
titatita - be uncertain what to do, or where to go.
titatitile - has feared to give an opinion. titêêl6_N. CL. 9N-, SING. OF dititêêl6, DER F.ditaya, a staff for beating skins when braying.
titê6 - a beating; a scourging; a wound made by a blow; a stroke.
titiedisa - help to brew liquor using unusual ingredients.
titiedisitse - has helped to brew liquor with unusual ingredients.
titiedisitswe - has been helped to brew liquor with unusual ingredients and at an accelerated rate of fermentation.
titiedisiwa - being helped to brew liquor using unusual ingredients.
titiêla - concoct beer.
titiêlêla - concoct beer for.
titieletse - has concocted beer for.
titietse - has made a fast or quick brew.
titintsê - has stopped or hindered one from speaking; has become prevented from speaking.
titintswê - being stopped in speaking; being prevented speaking.
titinya - stop or prevent one when speaking, when not wishing to hear more.
tiya - be firm, fixed or strong.
tla - come; ba tlaa tla, they will come.
tlaa_ - [LONG FoRM}, ke tlaa bo ke dira, 1 shall, or will be doing; shall; will.
tlaa bo - v.PHR, signifies that the action will be progressive and in the future; will be, or shall be; ke tlaa bo ke rêka, I shall be buying.
tlaa re v - PHR signifying future part of.
tlaatlaa - give a person no chance of answering by talking altogether.
tlabaka - be busy; be-active.
tlabakile - was busy; was active.
tlabama - sit in the way so as to obstruct; continue sitting and refuse to rise.
tlabame - be sitting flat on the ground, etc. tlabatlaba rep. < tlaba, go about restlessly; run in a clumsy fashion, as a loose-jointed person.
tlabatlabile - has gone about restlessly, etc.
tlabeleditse - has slandered.
tlabelediwa - being slandered.
tlabelets6 - a slander.
tladi - a thunderbolt; lightning.
tladi mothwana compP - 14¢.,a superstitious belief in which an imaginary person with an axe, operates in the form of a thunderbolt; a lightning strike from out of the blue, believed to be a winged person chopping with an axe.
tladi ya tlapana - a thunderbolt from a ear sky.
tladika - speak idly; dirty or soil, as with fat, milk, etc.; daub; bedaub; besmatter; besmirch, as the face, etc.
tladikêga - become dirty.
tladikegile - become dirty.
tladikêla - besmatter; besmirch.
tladikile - has daubed; be daubed besmirched, etc.
tladikisa - cause to besmirch, besmatter etc.
tladikisitse - caused to besmirch, besmatter, etc.
tladikisiwa - being caused to besmirch, besmatter, etc.
tladikiwa - being smattered, etc. be dirtied, or fouled.
tladikwa - (same as "fladikwa"), being smattered, etc. be dirtied, or fouled.
tladitse - has filled.
tladiwa - (same as "tlatswa"), being filled.
tlae - (same as "borobe"), the yolk of an egg.
tlaêla - joke.
tlakasêla - quake; shiver; tremble.
tlakasêl6 - 9N-, a trembling; a shivering, or quaking.
tlakasetse - has quaked shivered, or trembled.
tlakisa - charm; captivate.
tlala - note the format: ke tshwerwe ke tlala, I am hungry; ke bolawa ke tlala, | hunger. prov., tlala ga e na mafoko & tlala ga e laye go laya seramê.
tlala - become full.
tlalatlala - there and everywhere; be about a good deal; be much in evidence.
tlalatletse - is here, there and everywhere.
tlalea - report a fault to a superior.
tlaleditse - has filled; has caused to trouble, or distress, etc.
tlalediwa - being filled for; being made anxious.
tlaleile - has reported some fault to a superior; has complained to a superior of a person's conduct.
tlaleisa - cause to report some fault to a superior; help one to complain about another to a superior.
tlaleisitse - has caused a report to be made to a superior about some fault.
tlaleisiwa - being made to complain to a superior about a person's conduct.
tlalêla - trouble, or distress; be too much for.
tlalêl6 - trouble; distress; anxiety.
tlalêlê e e mahehe - intense distress; great haste.
tlalêtsa - fill for; cause to trouble or distress, etc.
tlaletse - is filled for; has caused to trouble or distress.
tlaletswe - being anxious.
tlama - gird a person about the loins; put a girdle on a person.
tlamaka - arm for a fight.
tlamakêlêla - fall short of what one ought to be; bungle; do a task badly.
tlamakêlêlwa - being badly done; being done in a slipshod way.
tlamakeletse - has fallen short of what one ought to be; has bungled.
tlamakeletswe - be bungled; has been bungled.
tlamalana - care for, or provide for one another.
tlamalanye - have cared for one another.
tlamanyeditse - has girded for a fight.
tlamanyetsa - gird for a fight.
tlamêla - take care of; minister to; care for.
tlamêlê - care; preservation; providence.
tlamêlwa - being provided for or taken care of, by another.
tlametlo - (same as "letlametlo and tlametlwe"), a bullfrog.
tlametlwe - (same as "/etlametlo and tlametlo"), a bullfrog.
tlametse - has provided for, or taken care of.
tlametswe - has been provided for, or taken care of.
tlamolola - disarm.
tlamolotsê - has ungirded; has disarmed.
tlampa - similar to kgantlha, crush.
tlamparêla - utch; catch, or seize hold of with both hands.
tlamparetse - has clutched.
tlamuka - spoil, or injure, by laying hold of; handle clumsily.
tlamukana - spoil, or injure one another.
tlamukêga - be spoiled; be handled clumsily.
tlamukêgile - has become spoiled.
tlamukile - has spoiled.
tlamukisa - help or cause to spoil, or injure, etc.
tlamukisitse - has caused to spoil, or injure, etc.
tlamukisiwa - being caused to spoil, or injure.
tlamukiwa - (same as "tlamukwa"), being "hêld carelessly. tlangwa_y.s. Pass. < tlama, same as tlamiwa, being girded.
tlantlape - 1A¢-, AND N. anv ditlantlape, same as mmamagotogotwane, kgatlampane, mmankgatlampane, tree or black-necked agama; a blue-headed lizard.
tlantsê - has pressed, as when fingerprinting or fingering a piano key.
tlantswê - has been pressed, as the key of a piano.
tlanya - as when fingerprinting or pressing the keys of a piano, etc.; pound between two objects.
tlanyêga - become tasteless, as a frosted pumpkin.
tlanyêgile - has become tasteless, as a frosted pumpkin.
tlaopa - deride.
tlapana - vim. oF tlapa a flat stone.
tlapea - as by food that is too sweet, fatty, etc.
tlapeêga - become nauseated.
tlapeêla - affect adversely so as to, said of food that is too sweet or fatty.
tlapeetse - has nauseated, said of fatty food, etc.
tlapeile - as food that is too sweet, fatty, etc.
tlapeisa - cause to nauseate, as food that is too sweet, fatty, etc.
tlapeisitse - has caused to nauseate, as food that is too sweet, fatty, etc.
tlapeisiwa - being caused to nauseate, as food that is too sweet.
tlapeiwa - as food that is too sweet, fatty, etc.
tlapetla - (same as "papetla"), flatten; crush so as to flatten; bruise.
tlapetlêga - become flattened.
tlapetlegile - has become flattened.
tlapetlêla - flatten for.
tlapisa - crush.
tlapisitse - has pressed down using a weight; has crushed; has pinched.
tlapisiwa - being pressed down by a weight.
tlapukeditse - has smeared with much fat.
tlapukediwa - being smeared with much fat.
tlatla - used in alternation with flatlana, DIAL. VAR. oF fotwana, a flat basket. NB. Tlatlana could be vim. oF Tlatla.
tlatlagwê - ¢-, AnD ditlatlagwê, same as motlatlagwe and motato, black korhaan.
tlatlapa - carry much; take much more than one's share.
tlatlapile - has carried away.
tlatlaraditse - has spread far apart, as legs.
tlatlaradiwa - being spread far apart, as legs.
tlatlarala - as legs when feet are close together.
tlatlaratsa - cause to be bent out, etc., as legs.
tlatlaretse - be bent out or spread far apart, as legs.
tlatsa - fill.
tlatsea - beat or strike much or hard.
tlatsêga - (same as "¢lala become full").
tlatsegile - (same as "tletse"), has become full.
tlatseile - has beaten, etc.
tlauma - stumble.
tlaumile - has stumbled:.
tle - V. FORM IN THE SUBJ. MOOD, expresses future as in gore a tle a rêkê, that he might buy, note the introd. form gore. tle HABITUAL MOOD ForM, forms part of verb or predicative used to express a customary or habitual act: ba tle ba leme, they usually plough, or they are in the habit of ploughing, or they sometimes plough.
tlekeediwa - (same as "tlekeetswa"), being spared, pampered, or spoiled.
tlekeetsa - (same as "¢likietsa"), spare pamper, or spoil.
tlekeets6 - tleeketsa, same as tlikiets6, a pampered, or spoilt person.
tlêla - come for, or with; bring another something.
tlelaemêtê - 9N-, imate [borrowed].
tlelase - 9N-, ass [borrowed].
tleleniki - 9N-, (For), inic.
tlelêrêkê - 9¢-, erk [borrowed].
tleleserine - glycerine [borrowed].
tlêpatlêpa - laugh immoderately.
tlepatlepile - has laughed immoderately.
tlêrê - which material makes when torn; a ripping noise.
tlerebeditse - has trumpeted as an elephant.
tlerebetsa - trumpet, as an elephant; speak in a high and rather shrill tone of voice.
tlêrêpana - (same as "6nala"), become old and worn-out; become of no further use.
tlêrêpanye - be old and wornout; has become of no further use.
tlêrêpê - 1A9-, AND and ditlêrêpê, an old and worn-out gadget, machine, or vehicle.
tlêtlêrêgana - become broken.
tlêtlêrêganye - has become broken, as a pot, etc.
tletse - is full.
tletse - has brought for.
tIhaba - s, similar to khukhwa or ngolo denoting an ox that is black with some admixture of reddish brown; also black and brown with vertical streaks or patches in male goats.
tlhaba - %., heap of corn.
tlhaba - cut, stab, or pierce; slaugther; also, rise as the sun. prov. go tlhaba kgêbê ka mutlwa; germinate.
tlhaba diane v - PHR, utter proverbs. tlhaba leinane v. Pur, relate folktale.
tlhabagana - be opposite or contrary.
tlhabagantsê - has pierced across.
tlhabaganya - pierce across; go, as the crow flies.
tIhabaganye - is opposite or contrary.
thabaganyeditse - has cut across.
tlhabaganyetsa - cut across; use a short cut.
tlhabakeditse - has become hoary-headed.
tlhabaketsa - -headed; become whitish, as ripening corn.
tlhabana - s, denoting a cow that is black with some admixture of reddish brown; also, black and brown with vertical streaks or patches in female goats.
tlhabana - (same as "Jwa"), fight; fight one another. Tlhabane n.cv.90-, Rustenburg in R.S.A.
tlhabanôê - similar to ntwa, a fight; war.
tlhabantsha - cause to fight; fight against; assist to fight by giving help in weapons and in other forms.
tlhabantshitse - has caused to fight; has fought against, etc.
tlhabanye - has fought; have fought one another.
tlhabatlhaba - stab or cut repeatedly; to wander about the country.
tlhabatlhabile - has wandered about the country.
tlhabatshe - similar to pinagare, the centre pole of a hut.
tlhabeditse - has stared at someone.
tlhabêga - become pierced.
tlhabêga - (same as "bedisa"), leaven; become teased.
tlhabegile - is pierced; is teased; has leavened, as dough, porridge, etc.
tlhabêgê - same as letlhabêgê, leaven.
tlhabêla - a thatching peg.
tlhabêla - pierce for; slice a melon or pumpkin into strips or thin slices for drying; sacrifice.
tlhabeleditse - has set a tune for singing.
tlhabeletsa - set a tune for singing; lead others in singing, or playing on reeds.
tIhabetsa - stare at another.
tlhabetsantsê - have shaken hands heartily.
tlhabetsanya - shake hands heartily. 1. PHR, go tlhabetsanya ka diatla, to shake hands heartily.
tlhabile - has pierced; has teased, or offended; has slaughtered; has germinated.
tlhabisa - cause or help to pierce offend, or slaughter; offer a slaughter animal to someone. tlhabisa ditlhong 1p. Expr, make ashamed; put to shame. tlhabisa phef6 1. expr, go out for fresh air; air a thing.
tlhabisitse - has offered a slaughter animal to someone; has deflated a bicycle.
tlhabiwa - be injected.
tlhabola - refreshing to the taste; pungent; mentally stimulating; piquant.
tlhabologa - improve in condition, as cattle that are better fed; have a relapse in sickness; change; change in one's outlook; become converted; make a spurt.
tlhabologêla - improve for.
tlhabologile - have improved, as cattle that are better fed; has become converted.
tlhabologê - 9N-., a change; a conversion; a spurt.
tlhabolola - renew; put new life into; renovate an old thing.
tlhabololêla - renovate for etc.
tlhabolotsê - has renovated; 'has renewed.
tlhabotsê - has stimulated, etc. was sharp, agreeably pungent and appetising.
tlhabuka - or thoroughly.
tlhabukeditse - has lapped.
tlhabuketsa - or drink like a dog.
tlhabukile - has pierced much, or thoroughly.
tlhadia - add water to a pot on the fire; seethe; swell, as water in a river.
tlhadiêga - be added, as water to a pot on the fire.
tlhadiegile - was added, as water to a pot on the fire.
tlhadiêla - add, as water to a pot on the fire for.
tlhadietse - has added, as water to a pot on the fire, for.
tlhadiile - has added, as water to a pot on the fire.
tIhadiisa - as water to a pot on the fire.
tlhadiisiwa - being caused to put water in a pot when beginning to cook.
tlhadile - has divorced; has ceased to cultivate a garden.
tlhadilwe - has been divorced.
tlhadisa - bring about a rejection.
tlhadisitse - has caused a divorce.
tlhadisiwa - being caused to divorce, or dislike.
tlhadiwa - (same as "tlhalwa"), being divorced.
tlhae - (same as "flhao"), an exclamation that is used in stopping something, particularly a calf from suckling.
tlhaedisa - cause to come short of, or fail.
tlhaedisitse - has caused to fail.
tlhaedisiwa - being caused to come short, or fail.
tlhaeditse - has failed one; has caused to run short.
tlhaeditswe - has been caused to come short.
tlhaêla - come short of; fail to.
tlhaeleditse - has called to; has shouted out from a distance.
tlhaeleditswe - has been called unto, etc.
tlhaêlêla - fall short of; be insufficient.
tlhaêlêlwa - be in short supply of; being short of.
tlhaelêtsa - call; shout from a distance hence telephone, telex, etc.
tlhaeletsana - call each other; communicate by telephone, telex, etc.
tlhaeletsanôê - tlhaeletsa communicate; communication.
tlhaêl6 - 9N-, a failure; a shortcoming.
tIhaetsa - cause to be short of.
tlhaetsa dinao - take long strides.
tlhaetso - a shortage.
tlhaetso ya dinao - a long stride.
tlhaetswe - be missed out in receiving a portion.
tlhafu - siING. oF ditlhafu, calf, of the leg.
tlhafuna - chew; masticate, hence ponder over, ruminate upon.
tlhafunêga - chewable.
tlhafunegile - has become chewed.
tlhafunêla - chew for.
tlhafunetse - has chewed for.
tlhafunile - (same as "tlhafunnê"), has chewed.
thhafunisa - help or cause to chew.
tlhafunisitse - has caused to chew.
tlhafunisitswe - has been caused or made to chew.
tlhafunisiwa - being caused to chew.
tlhafuniwa - (same as "tlhafunwa"), being chewed.
tlhafunnê - (same as "tlhafunile has chewed").
tlhafunnwê - has been chewed.
tlhafunwa - being chewed.
tlhaga - standing grass; pasture.
tlhaga - s., wild; wary; quick; active; alert.
tIhaga - start up; come into view; forcibly break out of a kraal, enclosure or stockade.
tIhagafaditse - has made to be quick, or active; has made anxious.
tlhagafala - be quick, or active; be awake to; become anxious; long for.
tlhagafalêla - watch over; keep awake for.
tlhagafaletse - has kept awake for; has redoubled efforts over.
tlhagafal6 - "hagafala, quickness; wakefulness.
tlhagafatsa - make quick or alert; put life into, or waken up.
tlhagala - an abscess; an ulcer; boil.
tlhagare - the small iron tip of a Bushman's arrow; the point of a thorn or splinter left in a wound; the middle lappet of three on a kaross.
tlhagasu - @, and ditlhagasu, old and dilapidated vehicle; a ramshackle vehicle.
tlhagêga - become warned; be startled and run away, as a frightened animal; rise early in the morning; start early before others; break out, as light.
tlhagêla - etc.
tlhagêlwa - be surprised by; have a misfortune.
tlhagetse - has happened to; has forcibly broken into a kraal.
tlhagetswe - has been surprised by; has had a misfortune.
tlhagisa - ise; startle; cause to forcibly break out of a kraal, etc.
tlhagisêga - become warned; take warning; take heed.
tlhagisitse - has warned; has startled; has caused to forcibly break out of a kraal.
tlhagisiwa - being warned; being made to break out of a kraal.
tlhagis6 - 9N-, a warning.
tlhagiwa - (same as "tlhagwa"), breaking out of a kraal, etc.
tlhag6 - 9¢., origin.
tIhagodisa - cause or help to weed.
tlhagodisitse - has helped or caused to weed.
tlhagodisitswe - has been helped or caused to weed.
tlhagodisiwa - being caused or helped to weed.
tIhagola - weed; hoe out weeds.
tlhagolêga - become weeded.
tlhagolegile - has become weeded.
tlhagotsê - has weeded.
tlhagotswê - has been weeded.
tlhaile - has failed to reach; was insufficient.
tlhajwa - (same as "tlhabiwa being pierced"), or stabbed.
tlhaka - a seed; a grain; embryo; a white speck in the eye; a letter of the alphabet.
tlhaka - grab food and run away with it.
tlhakaladisa - cause to be very angry.
tlhakaladisitse - has caused to be very angry.
tlhakaladisiwa - being caused to be very angry.
tlhakaladiwa - (same as "tlhakalatswa"), being in bloom.
tlhakalala - break into bloom; go forth as the light.
tlhakalatsa - be in bloom.
tlhakaleditse - is in full bloom.
tlhakaletse - has broken into bloom.
tlhakana - mix together; mix. 1D. ExPR go tlhakana tlhêgê, be confused; be mentally disturbed.
tIhakanêla - mix; be in joint ownership; share the use of. 1p. Expr, go tlhakanêla dikobê, to have sexual intercourse.
tlhakanetse - has mixed; has shared ownership of.
tlhakanngwa - being mixed.
tlhakantsê - has mixed.
tlhakantshuke - t. 9n.., topsy-turvy; being in a confused state.
tlhakantswê - has been mixed.
tlhakanya - mix; cause to be mixed.
tlhakanye - be mixed; are mixed.
tlhakany6 - a confusion; a muddle.
tlhakasagare - an island in an archipelago.
tlhakatlhakana - be jumbled; be entangled; be confused; be disarranged.
tlhakatlhakantsê - has jumbled.
tlhakatlhakanya - < tlhakatlhakana cause to be jumbled.
tlhakatlhakanye - has jumbled; be confused. Tihakeng Nn. cL. 99, same as Mangaung, Bloemfontein.
tlhako DER - addressing an ox or cow demanding that it stands properly.
tlhako - a hoof of a horse, ox, etc.
tlhakodisa - cause or help to wipe from the anus; deprive of; take without permission.
tlhakodisitse - has caused to clean an infant's stool; has deprived of.
tlhakedisiwa - being caused to clean an infant's stool.
tlhakola - deprive of; take without permission; wipe the anus. Tihakole n.ct.1a, the month of February.
tlhakolêga - become cleaned, as the anus when removing the remnants of faeces.
tlhakolegile - has become cleaned, as the anus after removing the remnants of the faeces.
tlhakolêla - wipe the anus for; wipe stools from.
tlhakoletse - has wiped the anus for.
tlhakotsê - has wiped the anus.
tlhala - divorce; give up as ploughing a garden, etc.
tlhalana - divorce mutually.
tlhale - a thread; a thread made of sinew; cotton thread; nerve.
tlhalefa - become wise; beware of; be wary. PROV., e re go tlhalefa ngaka bolwetsi le bênê o bo tlhalefê.
tlhalefeditse - has taken the largest, or best portion; has gained an advantage over another.
tlhalefetsa - take the largest, or best portion; gain an advantage over another.
tlhalefetse - has become wise to.
tlhalefile - be clever; be wise.
tlhalefisa - (same as "flhaletsha"), cause to be wise; make wise.
tlhalefisitse - has caused to be wise.
tlhalefisitswe - has been made wise.
tlhalefisiwa - being caused to be wise.
tlhalef6 - wisdom.
tlhalemaleje - a cunning person; a discerning person.
tlhaletsha - (same as "tlhalefisa make wise").
tlhalê - a divorce; a rejection.
tlhaloganngwa - being understood; being comprehended.
tlhalogantsê - has comprehended; has understood.
tlhaloganya - comprehend; understand; know, or recognise hence reckon, or ascertain number of cattle, etc.
tlhaloganyêsêga - understandable; become understood.
tlhaloganyesegile - is understood; has become understood.
tlhaloganyôê - understanding; mind; idea; thought; sense; reason.
tlhalosa - describe.
tlhaloseditse - has explained to.
tlhalosediwa - (same as "tlhalosetswa"), being explained to; being given an explanation.
tlhalosêga - be describable.
tlhalosêgêla - êga, becoming understood; become clear to, for.
tlhalosegile - has become understood; has become well explained.
tlhalosetsa - explain to.
tlhalositse - has explained.
tlhalositswe - has been explained.
tlhalos6 - 90, meaning; explanation.
tlhalwa - being rejected.
tlhama - fermented beer before it is boiled; leavened dough.
tlhama - compose; arrange the hair after it has been treated with oil or fat.
tlhamagantsê - has darned, mended or repaired.
tlhamaganya - darn; mend; repair.
tlhamaladitse - has straightened.
tlhamaladiwa - being straightened.
tlhamalala - as a path, etc.; be bolt upright; be stiff.
tlhamalalêla - /hamalala, go straight to; go in a straight line to; go directly.
tlhamalaletse - has gone in a straight line to.
tlhamalatsa - stretch; straighten out, as arms, etc.; straighten.
tlhamalatswa - being straightened.
tlhamaletse - be straight; was straight.
tlhamane - a tradition; a fable; a fairytale; an idle tale.
tlhamatsêga - improved.
tIhamatsegile - has improved; has been improved.
tlhamê - AND A», and botlhamê, same as tlhangwê, a secretary bird, less commonly used.
tIhamêga - put a person to lie on his back; turn over the carcase of an ox when skinning it.
tlhamegile - has put a person to lie on his back, ete.
tIhamê - 9%, fiction; a branch of literature which includes novels, short stories and other imaginative writings.
tlhamoga - melt (snow).
tlhamola - arify.
thhamukeditse - has caused to smear the mouth with fat when eating.
tlhamuketsa - cause to smear the mouth with fat, etc., when eating.
tlhanama - lie on the back with a quick motion, hence change a view over a matter, a sign of being unprincipled.
tlhaname - is lying on his/her/its back; has lain on his/her/its back.
tlhanamologa - rise up from lying on the back.
tlhanamologile - has risen up from lying on the back.
tlhanasêla - sway, as water boiling; move from side to side, as a crowd milling.
tlhanasetse - has swayed or moved from side to side, as a confused crowd.
tlhangwê - LA »- AND and ditlhangwê, the secretary bird. tlhano api.s, five.
tlhanoga - become changed in plan or purpose without due cause; be fickle or changeable in purpose; alter one's mind without any reason; be a turncoat.
tlhanogêla - ¢/hanoga, turn against. | tlhanogetse v.s.prr. < tlhanogêla, has turned against.
tlhanola - turn inside out; change the sides of a thing; alter the opinions of a person.
tlhanotsê - has turned inside out.
tlhanotswê - has been turned inside out.
tlhantlhabeditse - has tried to do a thing.
tlhantlhabediwa - (same as "tlhantlhabetswa"), being done in a sloppy and unsystematic manner.
tlhantlhabetsa - try to do a thing; fail to do a thing and give it a fine finish; produce a rough and unrefined product; get at the heart of a thing, etc.
tlhantlhola - (same as "thantholola"), pick to pieces; tease, as flax; undo plaited hair.
tlhantlhotsê - has picked to pieces.
tlhantsê - has become curdled as milk; has smitten; has struck, with a fist, etc.
tlhantsha - cause to be alert or on the look-out.
tlhanya - v.s.simp., become curdled, as milk that is not very fresh when boiled; strike with a fist; smite, etc.
tlhanyaka - strike or smite much; beat much; buffet.
tlhanyakile - has stricken much; has buffeted.
tlhanyaku - 9N., a necklet; a little bundle.
tlhanyêga - be on the alert; be stunned; be faint; have a premonition.
tlhanyegile - has had a premonition.
tlhaodisa - cause or help to sort or classify.
tlhaodisitse - has caused or helped to sort or systematise things.
tIhaola - select; separate.
tlhaolana - discriminate; sort each other out.
tlhaolegile - be sorted out, as things; has become sorted out, as things; has become separated.
tlhaolêla - select or enclose for; prevent the calf from suckling while milking is taking place.
tlhaolele - 9n., racial discrimination. np. gained importance as a result of the South African system of segregation.
tlhaolêsêga - selectable from; be choosable; be selectable.
tlhaolesegile - has become sorted; has become selected, etc.
tlhaoletse - has selected for etc.
tlhaologa - become diluted or dissolved by the addition of water; change from beestings after calving to normal milk.
tlhaologile - has become diluted, etc.; has become refined, as metals.
tlhaolola - dilute or dissolve.
tlhaolosa - refine, as metals; dilute, or dissolve by adding water.
tlhaolositse - has refined, as metals; has changed from beestings to normal milk.
tlhapa - and matlhapa insult; vulgarity.
tlhapa - wash the body; micturate or pass water [archaic].
tlhapadikantsê - has used foul language.
tlhapadikanya - use foul, violent language; blaspheme; curse and swear.
tlhapaditse - has blasphemed; has made profane.
tlhapaditswe - has been cursed or sworn at; has been blasphemed.
tlhapadiwa - (same as "tlhapatswa"), being cursed or sworn at; being blasphemed.
tlhapafala - become profane.
tlhapafetse - has become profane.
tlhapasêla - melt away, as a multitude.
tlhapasetse - has melted away, as a multitude.
tlhapatsa - insult; profane; blaspheme; secularise.
tlhapatsantsê - have blasphemed, or profaned each other.
tlhapatsanya - blaspheme, or profane each other.
tlhapats6 - cursing.
tlhapea - go in and out; go here and there.
tlhapeila - has gone hither and thither.
tlhapêla - wash in, for, or at.
tlhapêla - make riotous or noisy, as a drunken man; exhaust; intoxicate.
tihapêlôê - 9n-, riotous mirth; drunken revelry; noisy pleasure; debauchery; excess.
tlhapêlwa - exhaust; being intoxicated; being washed in, for, or at.
tlhapetse - has washed in, for or at; has made riotous, etc.
tIhapetswe - being washed for, or at; be drunk, etc.
tlhapi - a fish. PRov. tlhapi solofêla leraga, metsi a tshelê o a lebile.
tlhapile - has washed the body.
tlhapisa - cause or help to wash body; wash; cleanse by pouring water over, or cleanse ritually. tlhapisa ditlhôg6 1p. pur, make a customary gift, by uncle to nephew or niece.
tlhapisitse - has helped to wash the body, or part of the body.
tlhapisitswe - has been helped, or made to wash body, or part of body; had been cleansed.
tlhapisiwa - being helped to wash the body, or part of the body.
tlhapiwa - being washed.
tlhapôê - disorder; confusion; uproar.
tlhapologa - melt, or become dissolved, as ice, etc.; become softened, or melted, as metals; urinate.
tlhapologêla - melt for; urinate at.
tlhapologile - has become tall; has become unravelled, etc.
tlhapologile - has melted, or dissolved.
tIhapolosa - cause to melt, or dissolve; melt fat; make soft, etc.
tlhapoloseditse - has caused to melt, etc., for.
tIhapoloseditswe - has been caused to melt, etc., for.
tlhapolosediwa - (same as "tlhapolosetswa"), being caused to make soft for; being made a mess of, for.
tlhapolosetsa - cause to melt, or dissolve for; make a mess for.
tlhaposa - (transitive).
tlharakana - make a rattling noise.
tlharakantsê - has caused a rattling noise.
tlharakanya - cause a rattling noise.
tlharakanye - has made a rattling noise.
tlharaladitse - has caused to be stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharaladitswe - has been caused to be stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharaladiwa - (same as "tlharalatswa"), being caused to be stretched out stiff, as a corpse, fingers, feathers, etc.
tlharalala - be stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharalalwa - being stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharalatsa - cause to be stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharaletse - has become stretched out stiff, as a corpse.
tlharama - squat.
tlharame - has squatted.
tlharamologa - (divining sticks or folding chair, etc.).
tlharapeditse - has done a slipshod job; has repaired a thing badly; has done something in a slipshod fashion.
tlharapeditswe - has been badly done; has been done in a slipshod manner.
tlharapediwa - (same as "tlharapetswa"), being repaired in a slipshod manner.
tlharapeletsa - fix for rather badly.
tlharapetsa - make a temporary repair; make a poor and weak structure; repair a thing unsatisfactorily.
tiharikê - s., very quick in going; o tlharikê, you go very quickly.
tlharikile - has gone very quickly.
tlharoa - gallop, as a wildebeest, etc.
tlharoile - has galloped, as a wildebeest etc.
tlhasa - break up, as clouds, or a sickness; become less nice than usual.
tlhase - DIAL. VAR. OF tlase, below; under.
tlhase - a spark.
tIhasêla - assault.
tlhasêlana - attack each other.
tlhasêl6 - an attack; an assault.
tlhasetse - has attacked; has assaulted.
tlhasinyêga - tinkle, as a woman's ornaments; walk so as to make one's ornaments tinkle.
tlhasinyegile - as a woman's ornaments.
tlhasitse - have broken up, as clouds, or a sickness.
tlhasolole - t. one of the impersonations of the demi-gods in the female puberty ceremony.
tlhasunyele - 9n-, similar to motokwane, the wild teasel shrub; a species of wild Cannabis indica or dagga.
tlhatlagana - be piled up; lie in strata; lie one upon another, or be in layers, as things.
tlhatlaganôê - a layer; a stratum.
tlhatlagantsê - has piled.
tlhatlagantswê - things that are piled.
tlhatlaganya - put in layers; lay one on top of another, as bricks; pile up one on another.
tlhatlaganye - have piled up one on another.
tlhatlaganyeditse - has piled things up, for.
tlhatlaganyediwa - being caused to lie in strata, for; place as layers, for.
tlhatlaganyêga - become piled up; be layered.
tlhatlaganyegile - have become well placed in layers.
tlhatlaganyetsa - cause to lie in strata, for; place in layers, for.
tlhatlaya - (same as "tlhatlêga"), put a pot on fire; put on, or above.
tlhatlêêla - put a pot on the fire for.
tlhatleetse - has put a pot on the fire for.
tlhatlêga - be put on the fire, as a pot.
tlhatleile - has put a pot on the fire, as when starting to prepare a meal.
tlhatleilwe - has been put on the fire; cooking is being done.
tlhatleisa - hence help someone to prepare or cook a meal.
tlhatleisitse - has made or helped to put a pot on the fire.
tlhatleisiwa - etc.
tlhatleiwa - (same as "tlhatlêwa"), being put on the fire, as a pot at cooking time.
tlhatlêwa - (same as "tlhatleiwa").
tlhatlha - that are used for weaving baskets and also used for making garments for girls in the puberty ceremony.
tlhatlha - make a noise, as two things knocking together.
tlhatlhabala - be rough and untidy, as uncombed hair.
tlhatIhabetse - is rough and untidy.
tlhatIhamane - a medley of sounds; noises; a stampeding.
tlhatIhamedupe - 9¢-, rainbird; hornbill.
tlhatlhantsê - has imagined; has mused; has knocked things together so as to make a rustling noise.
tlhatlhanya - imagine; muse; knock things together, so as to make a rustling noise; chatter, as teeth.
tlhatlhara - gripe, as a severe pain, or soreness in the bones and body.
tlhatlharapa - do anything badly, or clumsily.
tlhatlhasêla - as a vehicle going over stones.
tlhatlhasetse - has made a jolting noise as a vehicle going over rough terrain. tlhatlhawê piaL var, same as ¢latlagwê, a korhaan; a bustard.
tlhatlhedisa - cause or help to put in, as cattle into a kraal.
tlhatlhedisitse - has helped to load a gun, etc.
tlhatlhêdisiwa - being helped to load a gun, etc.
tlhatlhêla- - put domestic animals into a kraal; load a gun; put tobacco in a pipe.
tlhatlhêlêla - etc.; offer someone some tobacco.
tlhatlhêlêl6 - 99-, lecture.
tlhatlheletse - has put in a kraal for, as cattle, goats, etc; has offered some tobacco to.
tlhatlhêl6 - n., sine. oF ditlhatlhêld, an enclosure; a compound.
tlhatlhere - has griped, as a severe pain, etc.
tlhatlhile - has made a noise, as two things knocking together.
tlhatlhoba - test; examine; inspect.
tlhatlhobana - examine one another.
tlhatlhobêga - is examinable; become examined.
tlhatlhobêla - diagnose for.
tlhatlhobile - has examined.
tlhatlhobisa - help or cause to examine.
tlhatlhobisitse - has caused or helped to examine.
tlhatlhobisiwa - being caused to examine.
tlhatlhob6 - n., an examination; consultation.
tlhatloga - ascend; moving away from a watering point, of animals once their thirst has been quenched.
tlhatlogêla - ascend.
tlhatlogetse - has ascended.
tlhatlogile - has ascended.
tlhatlog6 - 99-, ING. oF ditlhatlogê, ascension.
tlhatlola - remove, as a pot off a fire.
tIhatlolêla - remove, as a pot | off a fire for; give some to. |.
tlhatloletse - has taken off for, as a pot off a fire.
tlhatlologana - follow in succession, as months; proceed from one work to another.
tlhatlologantsê - has removed one thing off another; has ensured a welcome pause between one childbirth and the next.
tlhatlologanya - remove one thing off another; arrange in ascending or descending order; explain; unravel; move from one thing to another.
tlhatlologanye - have followed in succession.
tlhatlolola - take meat, etc. out of a too full pot.
tlhatlolotsê - has taken meat, etc., out of a too full pot.
tlhatlosa - cause to ascend; rise.
tlhatloseditse - has caused to ascend for.
tlhatlosediwa - being caused to go up for.
tlhatlosetsa - raise for.
tlhatlositse - has caused to go up.
tlhatlosiwa - being caused to ascend.
tlhatsa - vomit; overspill, as a river, etc.; give birth, by cats, dogs and other carnivorous animals.
tlhatsaka - or frequently.
tlhatseditse - has vomited on.
tlhatsetsa - vomit on or at. tlhatshe abv. OF PLA, DIAL VAR. Same as flhase and tlase, below; under.
tlhatsisa - cause to vomit; as a way of medication.
tlhatsisitse - has caused to vomit.
tlhatsisiwa - being caused to vomit.
tlhatsitse - has vomited.
tlhatsiwa - being vomited.
tlhats6 - a washing; baptism.
tlhatswa - wash anything; whiten.
tlhatswana - < ¢lhapi, a little fish.
tlhatswêga - become well washed, as linen; become clean.
tlhatswêgêla - ear for.
tlhatswêgile - has become clear as the moon; lit., has become washed, or whitened.
tlhatswisa - cause or help to wash.
tlhatswisitse - has helped to do laundry. tlhatswisiwa vV.S. PASS. < tihatswa, being caused to wash.
tlhatswitse - has washed anything.
tlhatswitswe - has been washed.
tlhatswiwa - being washed.
tlhaya - fail to reach; be insufficient (rarely used).
tlhê - AND ENCLITIC., never used to superiors; expresses surprise, supplication, wonderment, or impatience.
tlhetlhile - has run with elbows drawn in and body swaying. tlhêtlhwa_ DIAL. var. oF thêtlwa, rarely used, berry of the brandy bush.
tIhê - of landing on one or both legs.
tlhêa - hate; dislike; detest;,have an objection to.
tlhoa - whey; skimmed milk.
tlhoafaditse - has made to persevere, etc.
tlhoafadiwa - being made earnest, or zealous, etc.; being made to long or yearn after.
tlhoafala - be urgent; persevere; be zealous; be eager; long or yearn.
tlhoafalêla - be in earnest about; persevere over.
tlhoafaletse - be longing, or yearning for; be in earnest about.
tlhoafalê - N., zeal; earnestness; eagerness; importunity; diligence.
tlhoafatsa - make eager zealous, etc.; cause to be urgent.
tlhoafetse - is in earnest zealous or eager, etc.; is longing, yearning, etc.
tlhêana - êEc., hate; dislike, etc., one another.
tlhêanya - cause to hate, dislike etc., each other.
tlhêanye - be ina state of hating, disliking, etc., each other.
tlhoba - take a pinch of snuff; pinch; pluck off, as feathers from a fowl; pull hair off the skin with fingers.
tlhobaedisa - (same as "tlhobaetsa"), cause restlessness, or sleeplessness; make uneasy.
tlhobaedisitse - has caused restlessness, or sleeplessness.
tlhobaedisiwa - being caused restlessness, or sleeplessness.
tlhobaediwa - being made wakeful; being made restless, etc.
tlhobaêla - be wakeful; be restless; be anxious; worry.
tlhobaêl6 - n., anxiety; worry; sleeplessness; restlessness.
tlhobaêlwa - (same as "tlhobaediwa"), being wakeful; being useasy, or unsettled over.
tlhobaetsa - cause restlessness, or sleeplessness; prevent from sleeping.
tlhobaetse - be restless or unable to sleep, ete.
tlhobaetswa - (same as "tlhobaediwa"), being wakeful; being restless, etc.
tlhobaetswe - (same as "tlhobaêlwa"), being wakeful, etc.
tlhobêga - (same as "tlobêga"), become bald as an animal that is losing its hair, or a fowl its feathers.
tlhobêgêla - êga, becoming bald as an animal that is losing its hair.
tlhobegile - has become bare as a patch that is losing its plant life; be defeathered.
tlhobêgwa - becoming bare as a field that is being mowed.
tlhobodisa - cause or help to stamp grain so as to remove husks.
tlhobodisitse - has helped to pound grain so as to remove husks.
tlhoboga - becoming stamped, as grain pounded to remove outer coat.
tlhêbêga - give up hope; despair; leave desolate; leave for good.
tlhêbêgana - give up hoping over each other; leave each other for good.
tlhobogêla - become clean for.
tlhobogile - as grain being pounded.
tlhobogile - etc.
tlhobogisa - make to give up hope; cause to despair; cause to leave desolate, etc.
tlhobogisitse - has caused to give up hope.
tlhobogisiwa - being caused to despair.
tlhobogiwa - (same as "tlhêbêgwa"), being despaired; being given up for lost, ete.
tlhêbôg6 - 9n., a despairing.
tlhêbêgwa - (same as "tlhobogiwa"), being despaired; being given up for lost, etc.
tlhobola - to remove husks; pound grain in a mortar; to remove roughage.
tlhobolêga - be stampable, as grain; become pounded.
tlhobolegile - has become threshed.
tlhoboletse - has stamped grain for. tlhêbôl6_N. cL. 9n-, SING. oF ditlhôbêld, a quiver; a n.
tlhoboseditse - has caused to despair over.
tlhobosetsa - cause to despair over, of, etc.
tlhobositse - has caused to despair.
tlhobosiwa - being caused to despair.
tlhêbôtswana - 9Nz@-, revolver; piston.
tlhodia - annoy, or weary with noise; annoy, bother, or trouble with noise.
tlhodiêga - be annoyed, or wearied by noise; be worried or troubled; be restless and unable to sleep.
tlhodiêgêla - be troubled, or worried about; be annoyed, owing to noise.
tlhodiêgêlê - 9n-,a state of worry, or trouble for others.
tlhodiegetse - is, or was troubled or worried about.
tlhodiegile - was annoyed, or wearied by noise.
tlhodiêgê - 9N-, tlhodiêga, care; worry; annoyance.
tlhodiile - has annoyed; has made noise for.
tlhodiisa - help or cause to bother with noise.
tlhodiisitse - has caused bother, or annoyance by being noisy.
tlhodiisiwa - being caused to endure annoyance through unwelcome noise.
tlhodiiwa - troubled, etc. as by noise.
tlhodile - has created, as God heaven and earth; has spied; has looked something up; has portended good or evil.
tIhodisa - cause to remain for a day, or a time; cause to portend good, or evil.
tlhodisitse - has caused to remain, for a day, or for part of a day.
tlhodisiwa - being caused to remain, for a day.
tlhoditse - (same as "tlhodisitse has caused to remain"), for a day, or for part of a day.
tlhodiwa - (same as "tlhodisiwa being caused to remain"), for a day.
tlhodumêla - similar to okomêla, watch over; spy upon.
tlhodumetse - has watched over.
tlhoêla - dislike for.
tlhoêsêga - be hated.
tlhoesêgile - be hated; be detestable.
tlhoetse - has disliked, etc., for.
tlhoetswe - being disliked, etc. for.
tlhofi - 9N-, the corner of a garden, or piece of ploughed land.
tlhofofaditse - has lightened (decreased the weight).
tlhofofadiwa - being made light (decreased in weight).
tlhofofala - lighten (decrease the weight).
tlhofofatsa - caused to be light, weaken.
tlhofofetse - be light (in weight).
tlhoga - sprout, as a tree; burst into leaf; put forth leaves; grow.
tlhogêla - grow.
tlhogetse - has grown towards.
tlhogisa - cause to grow, or sprout.
tlhogisitse - has caused to sprout, or grow.
tlhogisiwa - being caused to sprout, or grow.
tlhogiwa - being sprouted. tlhêg6_N. cL. 9N., SING. oF ditlhdgêd, a head; a lead; a gift from nephew or niece to a maternal uncle.
tlhôg6-e-thata - USED WITH CONC stubbornness.:.
tlhêg6-moimêlê - 149 N-, a cannibal; someone who kills to make medicines using human flesh.
tlhêgdkgolwane - a species of grass with large flowers.
tlhêgêla - -otlhdêgêlê, mature.
tlhêgôn616 - s., happy; blessed; favoured; prospered.
tlhêgônôlêfaditse - has made happy, blessed, etc.
tlhêgêndêlofadiwa - ' < tlhdgdbnêlêfatsa being made happy, blessed, etc.
tlhêgônêôlêfala - become blessed, happy or prosperous.
tlhêgonôlêfal6 - "hdgdndlêfala blessedness; prosperity; happiness.
tlhêgônêlêfatsa - make happy; bless; make prosperous; prosper.
tlhêgônôlêfatsê - 9N., (hdgdndldfatsa, a blessing; prosperity; favour.
tlhêgônêlêfetse - has | become happy, etc. tlhêgôtlhôg6_N. cL. 9Nn., sING. oF ditlhhdgdtlhdgd [archaic], a headman.
tlhogotsê - has matured.
tlhêgwana - vim. of tlhêgêd, small head; prefix. | tlhoi_ N.spite.
tlhoile - has hated, disliked, etc.
tlhoisa - etc.
tlhoisitse - has caused to detest; has made to dislike, etc.
tlhoisiwa - being caused to hate, dislike, etc.
tlhoiwa - disliked, detested etc. tlhêka apv.s, similar to go sa rêka, expresses negotiation, as in go tlhdka go rêka, not to buy.
tlhêka - as a bull.
tlhêka - be in need of something one hasn't got; be without something. prov.ka e tlhêka ka tlhêka borêkê ka e bona le gonê ka bo tlhdka.
tlhêka - a ear drink made by allowing the solid matter to settle.
tlhoka - a wart; a nipple of a breast; an opening in a nipple; muzzle of a gun; the hole in the ear.
tlhêkafaditse - has made or caused to become scarce, or lacking; has caused to die.
tlhêkafaditswe - has been made or caused to be scarce; has been made to die.
tlhêkafadiwa - etc.; being made to die.
tlhêkafala - be scarce; become scarce, or lacking; be necessary; euphemistic reference to dying.
tlhêkafatsa - make or cause to be scarce, or lacking; cause to die.
tlhêkafetse - has become scarce, or lacking; euphemism for death; has died.
tlhêkagantsê - has arranged; has set in neat order.
tlhêkaganya - similar to tlhatlologanya arrange; set in neat order.
tlhêkana - lit., need each other; in need of; require, as in ba batlana le thusê, they are in need of help.
tlhêkêga - be scarce; be precious because of scarcity.
tlhêkêgêla - êga, be scarce for; be precious; be essential for.
tlhokegile - has become scarce.
tlhêkêla - êkêla pelo 1p. expr, lack sympathy toward; be unkind.
tlhoketse - has lacked sympathy toward.
tlhokile - etc.
tlhokisa - or be without.
tlhokisitse - has caused to lack; has made to run short of.
tlhokisitswe - has been caused to lack; has been made to run short of.
tlhokisiwa - being caused to lack; being made to run short of.
tlhôk6 - s, observant; not forgetful; o tlhêkê, he is observant; he has a good memory; he doesn't forget. 1p. ExPR,go êla tlhdkê, to take note of; to observe; to consider.
tlhoko - similar to tlhoka, the nipple of a breast; a wart; a mole on the body.
tlhokoditse - has sharpened.
tlhokoditswe - has been sharpened.
tlhokofaditse - has made or caused to become sad, or grieved; has caused one pain.
tlhokofaditswe - has been saddened.
tlhokofadiwa - being saddened.
tlhokofala - become sad, or grieved; be in pain.
tlhokofatsa - cause grief; sadden; torment.
tlhokofats6 - 9N-, a torment; that which grieves or pains; a tormenting.
tlhokola - (same as "tlhokolola winnow"),; sharpen, or make pointed, as a peg.
tlhokola - stamp beans, corn, etc., to separate the grain from the husks.
tlhokoloditse - has cut meat, or hides into long strips.
tlhokolola - (same as "tlhokola"), winnow; separate chaff from grain.
tlhokololêlwa - being winnowed for; has been winnowed for.
tlhokololetse - has winnowed.
tlhokolotsa - similar to fatola and golola cut meat, or hides into long strips.
tlhêkôma - take notice.
tlhêkêmêla - look after; take notice of; take heed; observe; pay attention to; consider.
tlhêkôêmêl6 - -, consideration; watchfulness over.
tlhokometse - has taken notice of, etc.
tlhokomile - has taken notice.
tlhokomologa - cease to take notice of; neglect; ignore.
tlhokomologile - has ceased to take notice of, etc.
tlhokotla - whittle a stick; strip, or cut off twigs or small branches.
tlhokotlile - has whittled a stick.
tlhokotlilwe - has been stripped off twigs or small branches.
tlhoketlsva - as twigs, etc.
tlhokotsa - sharpen.
tlhokotswe - be pointed, or sharpened, as a peg.
tlhêla - remain for a specified time, as a day; spend the day; tarry; sojourn; visit; bewitch.
tlhola - check up on something.
tlhola - often, usually.
tlhêlatlhêla - spend several days; sojourn for a short time.
tlhole - used in a negative aspect, no longer; not any more; ga ba tlhole ba leka, they no longer try.
tlholêga - becoine created.
tlholegile - has become created. tlhôlêgê_N. cL. 9N-, DER. F. lhdlêga, the character or nature of a person; nature.
tlhêlêla - created for; portend for; foreshow, or give warning to; persist.
tlhêlêl6 - fate or destiny (lit., that for which created).
tlhêlêlwa - being startled, or surprised by some unexpected and unwelcome event; being spied upon; being fated or destined.
tlholetse - has foreshadowed evil; spend a day on.
tlholetswe - has been portended, as an evil omen. tIhôl6_N. cL. 9n-, DER F.flhdla, a creation; a hillside.
tlhologêlêl6 - 9n-, "hologêlêla, a longing; an ardent desire.
tlhologêlêlwa - being desired, or longed for, as a person, or a thing.
tlhologeletse - desired, or was longing for a person, or one last seen a while ago; has longed for.
tlhologeletswe - has been desired or longed for, as a person or thing last seen a while ago.
tlholola - DIAL. VAR. OF Oflolola, which is in common use, stretch, e.g. legs.
tlholola dinao - (same as "otlolola dinao"), go phuthulola dinao and go iphokisa phefo, stretch the legs; take a short walk.
tlholotsê - (same as "otlolotsê has stretched out"), as hands.
tlholwê - -, a mythical animal of the antelope family.
tlhêma - fix in on end; appoint to a position. 1.ExPR, go tlhêma lotlhêkwa.
tlhomagana - fix in on end; appoint to a position; be in a single file; be arranged in a line.
tlhêmagantsê - has added to; has fastened together, etc.; has arranged in an orderly fashion or placed one after the other.
tlhêmagantswê - has been added to; has been arranged in an orderly fashion; has placed one after the other.
tlhêmaganya - add to; lengthen by adding to; fasten together; go to one place after another.
tlhêmaganye - one fixed in on end; were in a single file; were arranged ina line.
tlhêmalala - DIAL. VAR. oF tlhamalala stand erect; go straight on.
tlhêmaletse - DIAL. VAR OF tlhamaletse, has stood erect.
tlhêmama - be firmly fixed; stand fast.
tlhômame - has stood fast; has become firmly fixed.
tlhômamisa - make firm or fixed; fix; establish; ratify; confirm.
tlhêmamiseleditse - < thhêdmamiseletsa has protested to; has assured.
tlhêmamiselediwa - < thhômamisetsa being protested to; being assured.
tlhêmamisetsa - êmamisa establish, or ratify for.
tlhêmamisitse - has made firm, or fixed; has confirmed or verified.
tlhêmamisitswe - has been confirmed, or verified.
tlhêmamisiwa - being made firm, or fixed; being confirmed in a Christian Church.
thhêômamisê6 - 9N., a ratification; the sacrament of confirmation.
tlhômamê6 - firm; firmness.
tlhomara - ing; encompass.
tlhêmêla - appoint.or lay down for, as laws; arm or be armed, as for a fray; carry anything, on a stick over the shoulder.
tlhomeleditse - has lengthened out, i.e. has spoken at length.
tlhêmêlêla - êla, add to; lengthen; splice; add piece by piece; pierce with a sharp stick.
tlhomeletsa - lengthen out by speaking at length.
tlhomeletsa puo - lengthen out a speech; speak at length.
tlhomeletse - has added to; has lengthened, etc.
tlhêmêlôê - 9n-, similar to sebetsa, a weapon; a piece of armour.
tlhomere - is clinging.
tlhomesa - arm (active); roof a house; fix rafters, etc., in a house.
tlhomesisa - cause or help to roof a house.
tlhomesitse - has roofed a house.
tlhomesitswe - has been roofed, as a house.
tlhomesiwa - being roofed ie. having rafters fixed over a wall.
tlhomes6 - a rafter.
tlhomesolola - unroof a house.
tlhomesolotsê - has unroofed a house.
tlhometse - has fixed, or established, for, etc.
tlhomiwa - êngwa, being planted or fixed; being established, or appointed.
tlhomoga - depart; become extracted; become removed, as a thorn. thomoga pelo 1p. Expr, be moved with compassion.
tlhomogêla - take pity on; feel for; show compassion to; be kind, or merciful to.
tlhomogêla pelo - IN APPL. FORM OF V., tO have pity on.
tlhomogêlwa pelo - IN PASS. FORM OF V. being pitied.
tlhomogile - has become removed, as a thorn from flesh; has gone away; has departed.
tlhomokêla - as a youth.
tlhomoketse - has grown quickly or too fast for one's strength, as a youth.
tlhomola - take, or draw out, as a thorn; pull up, as grass. tlhomola pelo 1p. expr, be in a pitiable condition.
tlhomolana - &Ec, take out from one another, | as thorns. |.
tlhomolodisa - cause or H help to transplant.
tlhomolodisitse - has caused or helped to transplant. i.
tlhomolodisitswe - has been caused or helped to transplant.
tlhomolodisiwa - being caused or helped to transplant.
tlhomolola - transplant; take out, or dig up a pole.
tlhomololêla - transplant for.
tlhomololetse - has transplanted for.
tlhomololetswe - has been transplanted for.
tlhomololwa - being taken out, as a pole; being transplanted.
tlhomolotsê - has uprooted as a pole, a seedling, etc.; has transplanted.
tlhomolotswê - has been transplanted; has been uprooted, as a pole, a seedling, etc.
tlhomotsê - has extracted, as a thorn; has pulled up, as grass.
tlhonama - beg humbly and piteously; sit as one who is in a state of despair; be indefatigable; be in earnest. |.
tlhoname - is in earnest; has begged humbly and piteously; has sat as one who is in a state of despair.
tlhonamêla - beg humbly and piteously from; be sullen, morose, etc., for.
tlhonametse - has begged humbly and piteously.
tlhonamisa - cause to be in a state of hopelessness; make someone morose, dejected, sullen, etc.
tlhonamisitse - has caused to fall into a state of despair.
tlhonamisiwa - being made to look helpless.
tlhonamê - a humble petition.
tlhonatlhona - be restless; be ill at ease.
tlhonatlhonye - has become restless; has become ill at ease.
tlhong - shame. PrRov. tlhong botho; go tlhabiwa ke ditlhong, being ashamed.
tlhêngwa - (same as "tlhomiwa being planted"), fixed; established or appointed. tlhongwatlhongwe wn. ct. one of the impersonations of the demi-gods in the female puberty ceremony.
tlhono - a shaving scraped from a hide in braying.
tlhontsê - is looking sorrowful or disappointed; has stood erect or on end, as the hair on an angry dog, or sick animal.
tlhontsha - cause the countenance to look sorrowful; set on end the hairs, mane, or bristles.
tlhontshitse - has caused the countenance to look sorrowful.
tlhontshitswe - has been made to rise up, as hair on a dog's back, etc.; has been made to rise up, ete.
tlhonya* - look sorrowful or disappointed; be erect or on end, as the hair on a dog's back, or on a sick animal.
tlh66 - contracted form of letIhd6, dislike; aversion; hatred.
tlhê66-tomo - 9N-, helicopter.
tlhêpha - sort; separate; select by taking things of a given kind together; vote; nominate.
tlhêphana - select one another.
tlhophara - teasing game in which a person touches a child's or friend's private parts.
tlhopharana - mutually touching private parts in play.
tlhopharisa - cause or help to touch private parts teasingly in play.
tlhophêga - be selectable; be picked out; be sorted out.
tlhophegile - has/have become selected, sorted, etc.; has/have become chosen.
tlhophêla - select for; vote at, or for.
tlhophetse - has selected for etc.
tlhophile - has selected, voted, etc.
tlhophisa - etc.; officiate at elections.
tlhophisisa - 1nr, sort out, select, etc. intensively.
tlhophisiswa - has been caused or helped to sort out, vote, nominate, etc.
tlhophisitse - has caused to sort out, vote, nominate, etc.
tlhophisiwa - being caused to vote, etc.
tlhophiwa - being elected; being nominated; being separated.
tlhêph6 - 9n-, an election; voting; a nomination.
tlhophologa - (same as "tlhaphologa"), be tall; become unravelled; become straight.
tlhopholola - resort; select again; re-elect; discriminate against; remove from power.
tlhophololwa - being resorted; being discriminated against.
tlhopholotsê - has resorted; has discriminated against.
tlhopora - (same as "tlopola"), which is commonly used, take out; take out a handful.
tlhoporile - (same as "flopotsê which is commonly used"), has taken out a handful.
tlhêra - wither up; cause to famish, or waste away; cause emaciation; cause to long; be anxious of the outcome. tlhêra borêkôê 1p. expr, to deprive of sleep; make restless. \.
tlhora - similar to setlhoa, a pinnacle; the summit; apex.
tIhorama - sit on haunches.
tlhorame - be sitting on haunches; has sat on haunches.
tlhêrêga - become emaciated; become restless; be anxious.
tlhoregile - has become emaciated; has become restless; be anxious.
tlhêrêg6 - emaciation.
tlhorile - has worried persistently.
tlhorisa - cause persistent anxiety.
tlhorisitse - has caused to be anxious persistently; has irritated.
tlhorisitswe - has been caused to be anxious persistently; has been nagged, irritated, etc.
tlhorisiwa - being persistently worried by some particular matter.
tlhoro - (same as "futshe"), a hat; a fur cap.:.
tlhose - (same as "motlhose"), a species of jackal.
tlhdêsê - of setting alight.
tlhoseditse - has set fire to.
tlhoseditswe - has been set on fire, as an inflammable substance.
tlhosediwa - being set on fire as an inflammable substance.
tlhoseletsa - set fire to an inflammable substance for.
tlhosetsa - set fire to.
tlhêtlha - strain liquids.
tlhêtihêga - strainable, as beer.
tlhotlhegile - has become strained, as a beer.
tlhêtlhêla - a liquid, for; use shrewd words.
tlhotlheleditse - has incited; has provoked to action, etc.
tlhotlheleditswe - has been incited; has been provoked to action, etc.
tlhotlhelediwa - (same as "tlhotlheletswa"), being stirred up; being persuaded.
tlhotlheletsa - stir up; provoke to action; persuade.
tlhotlheletsêga - become provoked to action.
tlhotlheletsegile - has become provoked to action.
tlhotlhelets6 - 9N-, incitement; persuasion; encouragement.
tlhotlhiwa - (same as "thdtlhwa"), being strained, as beer; remove dregs.
tlhotlhologantsê - DIAL. VAR. OF tlhatlologantsê, rarely heard used, has removed one thing off another.
tlhotlhologanya - DIAL. VAR. OF tlhatlologanya, rarely heard used, remove one thing off another.
tlhêtlhêlogolo comp - F.letlhd6, hatred, and logolo, big; ARcH. except as part of the prov. tlhêtlhdlogolo lo tsosa di letseng, let sleeping dogs lie; fresh quarrels stir up old misunderstandings, or quarrels.
tlhotlhomisa - investigate.
tlhotlhomisitse - -has searched; has investigated.
tlhotlhomisitswe - has been searched, or investigated; has been ascertained accurately, as a doubtful matter.
tlhotlhomisiwa - being investigated.
tlhotlhomis6 - 9N-, an investigation; a proof or proving.
tlhotIhona - s. a persistent itch.
tlhotlhora - beat; shake off.
tlhotlhorêga - become shaken off; fall off; wither and fade. prov., khumê matlhare e a tlhotlhorêga.
tlhotlhoregile - have become shaken off.
tlhotlhorêla - shake off; shake off a container to catch remnants of meal.
tlhotlhoretse - has shaken off for.
tlhotlhori_ - 9N-, grounds of grain formed in brewing.
tlhotlhorile - has beaten to remove the dust; has shaken off.
tlhotlhorisa - help to shake so as to remove dirt, or dust from.
tlhotlhorisitse - has helped to remove dust, or dirt from an article by shaking it; has caused or helped to beat dust out of.
tlhotlhorisitswe - has been helped or caused to beat dust out of; has been helped to remove dust, or dirt from an article by shaking it.
tlhotlhorisiwa - (same as "tlhotlhoriswa"), being caused to shake off.
tlhotlhoriwa - (same as "tlhotlhorwa"), being shaken off.
tlhotlhorwa_ - being shaken off.
tlhêtlhwa - (same as "tlhwatlhwa"), a price; the value of a thing, as set by the seller.
thhêtlhwa - being strained, as beer.
tlhotsa - be lame; limp; cause to remain for a day, or for part of a day. prov., tlhotsa pele ga se e swa pele.
tlhotse - has tarried, or stayed for a specified time; has spent the day.
tlhwaêga - become scooped out; become rotten and fall in, as timber eaten by ants; be eaten and hollowed out, as the carcase of an animal.
tlhwaegile - has become scooped out, etc.
tlhwaile - has taken back through anger, or strife, that which one had lent, or given out; has hewn out a tree; has scooped out; has investigated.
tlhware - a python; a boa constrictor.
tlhwatlhwa_ - (same as "tlhotlhwa"), a price; the value of a thing, as set by the seller.
tlhwatlhwaeditse - has warned.
tlhwatlhwaeditswe - < tlhwatlhwaeditse has been warned.
tlhwatlhwaetsa - warn.
tlhwaya - take back, through anger or strife, that which one had lent, or given; hew out a tree; scoop out; seek information by listening. 1b. Expr, tlhwaya tsêbê.
tlhwêka - s., madi a tlhwêka blood before it is clotted.
tlikieditse - (same as "tlekeeditse has dealt tenderly with"),; has spared, pampered, or spoiled.
tlikietsa - (same as "tlekeetsa"), deal tenderly with; spare, pamper, or spoil.
tlikietso - (same as "tlekeetso"), a pampering; a favouring.
tlile - v.s. PFT. < fla, shall; will; ke tlile go bêna I shall see.
tlile - has come; ke ¢lile, I have come.
tlisa - bring; bring along.
tlisitse - has brought; has brought along.
tlisitswe - has been brought.
tlisiwa - (same as "tsisiwa and tliswa"), being brought.
tlo - IN THE SUBJ. MOOD EXPRESSES FUTURE, as in gore atle a reke, that he might buy. Note the introd. form gore.
tlo - DIAL. VAR. OF la, ortly used in the imperative as a kind of command.
tloba - similar to tlhoba, pull the meat off a hare's bones in order to dip it in fat before eating it; pull lean meat into shreds in order to.dip it in fat; pluck, as a fowl, or the hair off 4 skin. tlobaka v-s.simp., move about very much; be very busy in doing different kinds of work.
tlobatloba - (same as "tlabatlaba"), go up and down in an aimless manner; run in a clumsy fashion.
tlobatlobile - (same as "tlabatlabile"), has moved up and down in an aimless manner; has run in a clumsy fashion, as a loose-jointed person.
tlobeleditswe - (same as "tlobeletswe"), has been pressed down; has been pinned to the ground.
tlobelediwa - (same as "tlobêlêlwa"), being pressed down; being pinned to the ground.
tlobêlêla - press down; pin down or to the ground.
tlobeletse - has pressed down; has pinned down.
tlêdile - (same as "¢lêtse"), has smeared; has anointed.
tlodile - has transgressed; has jumped over.
tlodisa - cause to jump over.
tlodisa - cause to smear.
tlodisitse - has helped to smear.
tlodisitse - (same as "tshedisitse has helped or made to jump"),; has helped to cross a river, etc.; has been helped to cross over or to jump.
tlodisitswe - has been helped to smear.
tlodisiwa - being taken across a river; being caused to jump.
tloditse - has anointed.
tloditswe - has been anointed.
tlofofala - (same as "tlhofofala"), lighten (decrease the weight).
tlofofetse - (same as "tlhofofetse has become light"), or weightless; lose weight.
tloga - be cleansed; become clean.
tloga - ZO away.
tloga - soon; straightway; immediately; then; thereupon; re tloga re tsamaya, we will soon go away.
tlogedisa - cause to leave behind; cause to leave.
tlogêla - depart from; leave (something); forsake; leave behind. tlogêlêla y.s. appL. oF ¢logêla, leave behind for.
tlogeletse - has left for.
tlogêlwa - being left; being forsaken.
tlogetse - has left.
tlogetswe - has been left.
tlogile - has become cleansed; has become clean.
tlogile - has left, or gone away.
tlogisa - cause to depart, or leave, etc.
tlogisa - ean; eanse.
tlogisitse - has caused to depart; has cleaned; has cleansed.
tlogisitswe - has been made clean; has been made to be cleansed.
tlogisiwa - being caused to depart; being made clean; being made to be cleansed.
tlogiwa - being departed.
tlogologa - become penitent.
tlogologile - be penitent; has become penitent.
tlojwa - (same as "tlhobiwa"), being plucked, as feathers, etc.
tlêka - similar to thwala, pick up a lost object.
tlokile - has found a lost object.
tlokolola - (same as "tlhokolola and tlhokola"), whittle a stick; strip, or cut twigs, or small branches; winnow.
tlokoma - (same as "tlukuma"), shake violently in all directions, as a tree by a gale of wind.
tlokomile - (same as "tlukumile"), has shaken about in all directions.:.
tlokotla - (same as "tlhokolola"), whittle a stick; strip, or cut off twigs, or small branches; winnow.
tlokotsê - (same as "tlhokotsê"), has lacked sympathy toward.
tlokwa - s.,same as thokwa, refers to male cattle, horses, etc., that are dark brown, near chocolate in colour.
tlokwê - perennial herb with slender prostrate branching hairy stem; a Sclepiadaceae.
tlêla - smear; anoint.
tlola - jump over; jump up; transgress.
tlolaganngwa - be pregnant.
tlolagantsê - has stepped, or strode over; has stepped across.
tlolagantsha - make to step, or stride over; make to step across.
tlolagantshitse - has made to cross, step or stride over.
tlolaganya - step, or stride over; step across.
tlolagany6 - a stepping, or passing over.
tlolaka - leap violently.
tlolakêla - jump about for.
tlolakile - has jumped about.
tlolatlodile - has leapt, or hopped about.
tlolatlola - or hop.
tloletse - has jumped. t1616_N. cL.9N-, DER F. "6a, an anointing; a smearing; an ointment, same as serlôl6.
tlolê - a transgression.
tlolofoje - ¢., a species of hare, the totem of the Batswapong tribe.
tlolwa - being transgressed.
tlomoga - (same as "fomoga"), stand up; stand upright.
tlomogile - (same as "tomogile"), has risen from a sitting posture.
tlomokeditse - has continued a narrative, etc., broken off.
tlomoketsa - continue a narrative, or praise song broken off.
tlênkatlênka - eat sparingly, or in a mincing manner.
tloo - an underground bean; a round bean.
tlopa - hop, as a locust or frog.
tlopatlopa - as a bird; hop about much.
tlopatlopile - has hopped about much.
tlopêla - overdo a thing; put too much sugar, salt, etc., in food; have too much.
tlopetse - overdo in flavouring food; has put too much sugar, salt, etc., in food.
tlêp6 - shortened form of /êtldpê and setlêpê the comb of a bird's head; the crest of feathers on a bird's head.
tlopodisa - cause to take out; take out a handful.
tlopodisitse - has caused to take out a handful.
tlopodisitswe - has been caused to take a handful.
tlopodisiwa - being caused to take out in small measures.
tlopola - take out; take out a handful.
tlopolêga - become taken out, as a small amount from a whole lot.
tlopolegile - is taken out; has become taken out.
tlopolêla - give some to; take out a handful for.
tlopoletse - has taken out a handful for.
tlopolwa - as a handful from.
tlêpêtla - similar to tsêpdtla, wet through; soak, as rain a person.
tlopotlile - has wetted through, as rain a person; has wetted thoroughly.
tlosa - take away; remove.
tloseditse - has taken away for; has removed for.
tlosediwa - being removed for.
tlosetsa - take away, or remove for.
tlositse - has taken away, or removed.
tlosiwa - being removed.
tlosolosa - defer.
tlosolositse - has deferred; has postponed.
tlosolositswe - has been postponed; has been deferred.
tlosolosiwa - being deferred; being postponed.
tlotla - honour; favour; bless with abundance.
tlotlafala - abound; become abundant rarely used.
tlotlafetse - has become abundant, rarely used.
tlotlêga - become honoured; be honourable.
tlotlêgêla - êga, become honoured for.
tlotlegile - has become honoured.
tlotlêg6 - N., ¢lotlêga, favour; honour; excellency.
tlotlile - has conversed.
tlotlisa - cause to converse.
tlotlisana - converse mutually.
tlotlisantsê - have conversed.
tlotlisanya - generate conversation mutually.
tlotlisitse - has caused to converse.
tlotlisiwa - being caused to converse.
tlotliwa - being engaged in a conversation.
tlotliwa - ôtlwa, being - honoured; being respected.
tlotlê - 99-. honour.
tlotlogile - has become dishonoured.
tlotlologa - be, or become dishonoured.
tlotlolog6 - dishonour.
tlotlolola - dishonour; disrespect.
tlotlolol6 - 9n-, dishonour.
tlotlolotsê - has dishonoured.
tlotloma - DIAL. VAR OF fotonya, pick up one by one with the fingers; peck.
tlotlomala - stand high; be exalted; become highly honoured.
tlotlomaldê - majesty; excellency.
tlotlometse - - stands high; is exalted; has become highly honoured.
tlotlopa - eat very much; continue eating for a long time, as a hen.
tlotlopile - has eaten very much.
tlêtlwa - (same as "¢lôtliwa"), being honoured; being respected.
tlotlwa - ¢lotliwa, being engaged in a conversation.
tlotsa - cause to anoint; smear a thing with fat, soap, etc.
tlotsê - (same as "ftlodile"), has anointed; has smeared.
tlotso - an anointing; unction; extreme unction.
tlou - an elephant. PRov. tlou fa e tlola molapê tlotswana.
tlukuma - (same as "tlokoma"), shake about in all directions, as a tree by a gale of wind.
tlukumile - (same as "tlokomile"), has shaken about in all directions.
tlulukhouse - glucose [borrowed].
tlwaedisa - (same as "tlwaetsa cause to be acquainted").
tlwaedisitse - has caused to be acquainted.
tlwaedisitswe - has been caused to become familiar or acquainted with.
tlwaedisiwa - being made accustomed to.
tlwaeditse - has habituated, or accustomed to; has familiarised with.
tlwaeditswe - has been familiarised with; has been habituated, or accustomed to.
tlwaediwa - (same as "tlwaetswa being habituated"),; being familiarised with.
tlwaêla - become accustomed to; be experienced in; be acquainted with.
tlwaêlana - become friends; become acquaintances; become used to each other, tlwaêl6_N. cL. 9N-, DER F. tlwaêla, a habit.
tlwaetsa - (same as "tlwaedisa accustom"),; habituate.
tlwaetse - has become accustomed to; has become experienced in; has become acquainted with.
tlwang - a corn on the foot.
tlwaolola - break a habit.
tlwaolotsê - has broken a habit.
toba - a blunt arrow.
toba - look around, or aside, with eyes cast down.
toba-tobeditse - has made a choice.
toba-tobeletsa - -tobêlêla, make a choice for.
toba-tobetsa - make a choice.
toba-tobetse - has frequented without success.
tobaka - prepare to receive visitors; prepare to start on a journey.
tobê - Ip. Expr, of pressing or denting a soft cushioned, fluffy or swollen surface with some object.
tobeditse - has pressed in or down with the flat part of a finger.
tobediwa - being pressed in or down with the flat part of a finger.
tobekana - be shapeless or formless; be indistinguishable by being mixed up together.
tobekantsê - has mixed together; has jumbled up, or muddled up.
tobekanya - mix together; jumble up or muddle up.
tobekanye - was shapeless or formless; has muddled, jumbled or mixed up together, so as to be indistinguishable.
tobeleditse - has pressed in for.
tobeleletsa - press in for.
tobeletsa - press for.
tobetsa - press in or down with the flat part of a fingertip.
tobetsêga - be pressable, as an elastic body; be yielding, as an elastic body or a ripe abscess, etc.
tobetsêgêla - be pressable for as an elastic body.
tobetsegile - has become pressed.
tobisa - dent or dint in, as an elastic body; press in or down with the tip of the finger.
tobisitse - has pressed in or down with the tip of the finger.
tobisiwa - being pressed in or down with the tip of the finger.
tobu - EXPR, similar to tolobu, of falling into water.
todi - (same as "Jelodi and kgobati").
toga - (same as "togwa"), a roll of tobacco.
togabolêtsana_ - a secret plan.
togakan6 - an entanglement.
togamaanê - and maand, plans; a device; a plan; an arrangement.
togwa - a roll of tobacco.
toise - Same as lonaka, a snuff box or horn. Toje N.a, the Sekgalagadi name for God or Modimo [borrowed].
têka - ¢-, black earth or ay.
têka - cut meat into long strips; make biltong.
tokêl6 - 9N-, a small sack or pouch worn by women; the pouch ina baboon's cheek.
tôk6 - 90, same as tôka, black earth or ay.
toko - (same as "simane name used when pampering a small boy").
tokofatsa - make better; develop.
tokologanôê - dislocation.
tokologê - 9-, progress.
tokololê - (same as "leloko"), a joint, as of a finger, leg, etc.; neologism, refers to a member of an organisation.
tokomeditse - has made stupid or dazed.
tokomediwa - being made stupid or dazed.
têkêmêla - be stupid or dazed, as through sickness.
tokometsa - make stupid or dazed.
tokometse - has become stupid; has become dazed. tokwa see thokwa, apv.s., dark brown colour of male cattle, horses, etc.
tolamê - similar to tshiamo, straightness.
tolo - a toll [borrowed].
toloki - reel.
tolonyane - 9N-,a soothsayer.
tolêrôê - [6lôêra, a wasting or squandering of other people's things.
tolwana ya leitlhê - eye-ball.
tolwane - the end of the large intestine in cattle, traditionally eaten by old people.
tômama - drink water from a well, etc. while lying down.
tômame - has drunk water from a well, etc., while lying down.
tômamêla - lie, or kneel down, so as to drink water from a riverbed, etc.
tômametse - has lain down etc., so as to drink water from a pond, etc.
têmamologa - stop drinking directly from a well, etc., by lying down.
tomamologile - has finished drinking water in a lying down position.
tômamolola - make to stop drinking water from a riverbed while kneeling down.
têmamolotsê - has stopped from drinking kneeling or lying down.
têmêga - rarely used, be proud or haughty; be arrogant.
tomêga - a mark left by cupping; a scar made by a knife used in bleeding.
tomegile - is proud or haughty.
têmêla - spear.
tomeletso - a begrudging; an ignoring.
tometse - has pierced; has speared.
tôm6 - bridle.
tomo - ExPR, of standing up suddenly.
tomoga - be pulled up, as a fast-running animal.
tomogile - has been pulled out with finger and thumb.
tomola - pull out with finger and thumb; catch a fast-running animal.
tomoiogan6 - a division.
tomolog6 - 9N-, a separation.
tomolola - separate; stop drinking by one who was drinking directly from source or from a big container.
tomololôê - a separation.
tomolotsê - has separated.
tomotsê - has pulled out with finger and thumb.
tona - s, male, the opposite of namagadi, female; huge in size.
tona - government minister.
tona - bend down the head and the body.
tonaka - bend down the head and the body.
tonakgolo coMP - AND 9N-, prime minister.
tonama - similar to tonne, stand or walk with the trunk bent and so making the buttocks protrude.
toname - has made the buttocks to protrude.
tonamêla - bend the head and body so as to make the buttocks protrude.
tonametse - has bent over 'forwards so as to make the buttocks protrude.
tonki - AND 9N-, donkey. tonna apjJ.s, same as tonanyana, large; great in size, or position.
tonnê - has bent the head and body so that some part protrudes.
tonoga - be exposed.
tonogile - is exposed.
têntêbane - a small bird of the tit species.
tontojane - (same as "tontonyane"), a tit.
têntêôlê - the tip of a root.
tontonyane - (same as "fontojane"), a tit.
tootso - a grindstone; a whetstone.
têpa - mend clothing.
topaladitse - has caused to stand upright.
topaladiwa - being caused to stand upright.
topalala - stand upright; raise up straight.
topalatsa - cause to stand upright; raise up straight.
topêla - lay hold of tightly; take hold of tightly; possess entirely; obsess.
topêtêga - languish; become helpless from pain or weariness.
topetegile - etc.
topetse - has laid hold of tightly.
topetse - has mended clothing for.
topetswe - has been in the grip of; has had clothing mended.
têpd - a request.
têp6 - top; wooden or metal toy.
tôrê - a dream.
toroko - prickly pear; Cactaceae.
toronkê - a prison [borrowed].
torêp6 - a town [borrowed].
tosene - dozen [borrowed].
tosola - (same as "matsabane and thosola"), early infections of syphilis.
tosololê - (same as "lesololê a hanging down"), as of hands; a folding, as wings.
têta - ADV. really; as a matter of fact; actually; really and truly.
têta - specify; single out.
tota - increase; abound; multiply (of fruit, corn, etc.).
totafala - increase; become large; multiply.
totafalêla - become increased, etc., for.
totafaletse - has become increased for.
totafalê - an increase.
totafetse - has increased; has become large; has multiplied.
têtatêta - very definitely; without any doubt, etc.
têtêla - specify for; pinpoint for.
totêla - increase for; abound for (as corn etc.).
totile - has abounded, or multiplied (of fruit, corn etc.).
totile - has specified; has aimed at accurately.
totisa - cause or help to increase abound, etc.
totisitse - has caused to increase etc.
totisiwa - being caused to increase, etc.:.
totlhany6 - a cause of strife.
totê - increase [D.].
toto-toto - term of endearment used to encourage a baby to stand or walk.
têtêba - as an old person, an invalid or a child who is learning to walk.
totobala - lie stretched out, as a dead animal; lie stretched out motionless.
totobetse - is lying stretched out motionless.
totobile - has walked totteringly, or slowly as a person, an invalid or a child who is learning to walk.
totobisa - cause or help to walk totteringly.
totobisitse - has caused to walk slowly, etc.
totobisiwa - being caused to walk totteringly.
totologa - act defiantly; be headstrong; despise food.
totologile - be headstrong.
totoma - ridge; bulging as a well-filled bag, or well-stuffed cushion; in a heap.
totomala - lie still, incapable of moving; lie stretched out and motionless; lie stretched out, as a dead animal.
totome - bulge.
totomile - has bulged out.
totonya - pick up one by one with the fingers; peck, as a bird its food.
totonye - has pecked one by one, as a bird its food.
tototsha - have a large progeny; continue to add to one's family.
tototshitse - has continued to add to one's family.
totoula - beat very hard.
totoutsê - has beaten very hard.
totsafalôê - deceit.
totšhe - (FoR, torch.
totwanatotwana - oFrMaN, in large numbers; dikgomo di sule totwanatotwana, the cattle have died in large numbers.
tou - ExPR, of hammering or pounding.
touta - pound; pound to powder; reiterate.
toutile - has reiterated.
towane - bush tea.
tSA - PART. OF QUAL. CONSTRUCTIONS OF CLS. 8 AND 10, dilêpê tsa rona, our axes (CL. 8); dikgomo tsa rona, our cattle (CL. 10).
tsa loapi - 99, imate.
tsaa - contracted form of tsaya, take; used in polite commands and in imp. EXPR. when offering anything.
tsaa bo ross - PHR, contracted form of tsa ga bênê; dilê tsaa bo, lit., things of (theirs), i.e. their things, their possessions. tsaa-tsia v. pur, lit., take care; be careful; take note.
tsaana - (same as "fsayana"), accept one another; take one another in marriage.
tsaang tsia v - PHR, lit. (you in the plural), take ye care; be careful; take note.
tsaba - spread, as a rash.
tsabakêla - glisten.
tsabaketse - has glistened.
tsabile - has spread, as a rash.
tsabo - PHR, lit., of they or them; belonging to (them); dikgomo tsa bomalomê, the cattle of my-uncles, or the cattle of my uncle and company.
tsabunya - stab.
tsadisa - cause to conceive (of humans); cause to bring forth.
tsadisitse - has caused to conceive.
tsadisiwa - being caused to conceive.
tsaga - a large ay vessel for holding brewed beer.
tsakuga - die suddenly.
tsakugile - _N.CL.9N-, SING. OF ditsala, a friend; a womb in an animal. tsala_v.s. simp. beget; bring forth.
tsalaba - be pleasing; be satisfactory.
tsalana - are blood relations; be friendly with.
tsalanê - favour; friendship.
tšale - shawl.
tsalêga - be well bred; have a fine personality.
tsalegile - is well bred.
tsalêla - bear for, or at.
tsaletse - has borne an offspring for, or at.
tsaletswe - has been born at or for.
tsalôê - birth; child-bearing. tsal6_N.N., a collar-bone.
tsalwa - is begotten, or born; used of humans and animals.
tsamaalana - associate with; go together.
tsamaalanye - has 'associated with.
tsamaêla - go to, or for.
tsamaile - has gone.
tsamaisa - cause to go away; hurry.
tsamaisitse - has caused to go away.
tsamaisiwa - being caused to go away.
tsama6 - mode of living; demeanour; character.
tsamaya - until, as in go tsamaya.
tsamaya - 20; gO away. ID. EXPR, fsamaya le letlhale o tlhalefê, o tsamayê le lesilo o silofale. tsamaye vV.s.sIMP. NEG., used in HAB. MOOD; means until.
tsampêga - similar to phanyêga, die suddenly.
tsampegile - has died suddenly.
tsamuka - ick; make a icking sound.
tsamukile - has made a clicking sound.
tsamuru - a little lamp.
tsandi - Natal mahogany; Tiliaceace.
tšang - (same as "fsiang"), interrogative that elicits the colour or distinguishing marks of an animal; also refers to the sex of a young animal; e tšang, what colour is it? or what are its distinguishing marks? or what sex is it?.
tsanka - wound badly, or in many places.
tsankile - has wounded badly, or in many places.
tsank6 - a severe wound.
tsantsabeditse - is clever in ornamental work, sewing, writing, etc.
tsantsabetsa - sewing, writing, etc.
tsapisa - collect in small quantities.
tsapisitse - has collected in small quantities.
tsapisiwa - (same as "kotlopisiwa being collected in small quantities").
tsapo - of spitting, or ejecting; of jumping.
tsapoga - < jump up; become wet or sprinkled.
tsapogêla - jump at, or to.
tsapogetse - has jumped at.
tsapogetswe - has been sprinkled.
tsapogile - has become wet or sprinkled.
tsapola - leap; milk a cow dry.
tsapotsê - has leapt.
tsaranyetsêga - spit out noisily, as from between the teeth.
tsaranyetsegile - has spat out noisily, as from between the teeth.
tšararêga - be sour; be in a rage.
tšararegile - is bitter, or sour.
tšararêg6 - bitterness; sourness; rage.
tsarola - cut straight; tear straight; tear with one's nails.
tsarolêla - cut straight for.
tsaroletse - has torn straight etc.
tšarologa - become very sour or angry; be furious.
tsarotsê - has cut straight, etc.
tsatsaragana - part asunder; become split.
tsatsaragantsê - has split up; has cut a carcase down the middle of the backbone.
tsatsaraganya - split up; cut a carcase | down the middle of the backbone.
tsatsaraganye - has parted asunder, etc.
tsatula - similar to tsubula, snatch.
tsatutsê - has snatched.
tsaya - take; take a wife; marry.
tse - s.8 AND 10 DEM. QUAL. AND Pos. indicates pos. that is the same distance from both the speaker and the person spoken to; these; dilêpê tse, these axes (); dikgomo tse, these cattle ().
tseana - be amazed; be in perplexity; become stupified. |.
tseane - is amazed, or perplexed.
tseanngwa - be astonished perplexed, or confounded, by.
tseandê - amazement; perplexity; discomfiture; confusion.
tseantsê - has amazed; has confounded, etc.
tseantsha - cause to become foolish, or stupid; confuse; confound.
tseantswê - has been amazed or perplexed by.
tseanwe - has been amazed, or perplexed.
tseanya - amaze; perplex; confound; discomfort; make stupid.
tseanye - be stupid; be confused or amazed.
tsêbê - an ear; a page; a leaf of a book. 1p. Expr, sekêga tsêbê, incline the ear; thaanya tsêbê, pay heed.
tsebea - aS corn or trees in the wind, or a crowd of excited people.
tsebeêlêla - 9N-, a slope.
tsebeetsêga - aS corn or trees in the wind; wave, as standing corn or grass; move about, as a crowd of excited people.
tsebeetsegile - has swayed as corn or trees in the wind; has waved, as standing corn or grass.
tsebeile - has swayed, as corn or trees in the wind or as a crowd of excited people.
tseberu - a species of small dove.
tsêêla - take for; take from.
tsêêlwa - being taken for; being taken from.
tseetse - has taken for; has taken from.
tseetswe - has been taken for or from.
tsefumolê - a sigh.
tseile - (same as "ftsere"), rarely used; has taken.
tseile tsia PFT. v - PHR, has considered; has observed or taken heed.
tseisa - help or cause to take.
tseisitse - has helped or caused to take.
tseisiwa - being caused to take.
tseisê-molato comp - credit.
tseka - kiss; carry with both hands.
tsekagantsê - has beaten hard with a thick stick.
tsekaganya - beat hard with a thick stick.
tsekêga - See tshekêga which is more commonly used. tsekegile see tshekegile.
tsekile - has kissed; has carried with both hands.
tsela - a path; a way; a.
tselakgolo - highway; main road.
tsemelêla - tire out; overwhelm.
tsem6 - (same as "tlhamôd"), a creation.
tsempolola - be bad, or worthless, of acts or habits.
tsempolotsê - is bad, or worthless.
tsêna - enter.
tsena - spoil quickly, as food left over from a past meal.
tsênêga - be approachable; be responsive; is accommodating.
tsenegile - was approachable, or responsive.
tsênêg6 - be in a state of nervous shock.
tsenekêga - become full of folly or mirth.
tsênêla - enter for; enrol for; reach into; enter by force, or without consent.
tsenêla - as bread, etc., for.
tsênêlêla - ênêla, become a participant; enter for; join late; intrude.
tseneletse - has entered for.
tsênêlwa - being entered for; being in trouble.
tsenetse - be in trouble; was in trouble; has enrolled for.
tsenetswe - has been enrolled for.
tsenkê - (same as "tshenkê"), a search.
tsenkolola - disarrange; disturb things.
tsenkolotsê - has disarranged; has disturbed.
tsennê - has become spoiled quickly, etc.
tsenngwa - being inserted, or put in.
tseno - S.8 AND 10 DEM. QUAL. 1ST Pos., these here nearer the speaker.
tsenolola - repeal; undo, as madness.
tsenolotsê - has repealed, or undone.
tsentse - has caused to enter; has inserted or put in.
tsêntsha - make crazy; cause to be mad.
tsentshitse - has made crazy.
tsentshiwa - being driven mad.
tsentswê - has been caused to enter.
tsênwa - < being entered; being mad; being possessed.
tsenya - put in; cause to enter.
tsenye - has entered; has gone in; has arrived.
tsepa - throw a spear, etc., so as to make it stick upright in the ground.
tsepalala - (same as "tsepana"), stand upright; be erect.
tsepaletse - is standing upright or rigid.
tsepama - (same as "fsepalala"), be fixed.
tsepamêla - be fixed upon, as eyes staring.
tsepametse - has fixed upon as eyes gazing at.
tsepêga - become fixed or centred.
tsepegile - has become fixed or centred.
tsepel6 - [DJ], a walking; a walk.
tsere - an exclamation used when stopping a confrontation between two parties.
tsere - has taken; has married a wife.
tseregantsê - has mediated; has separated contending parties; has umpired.
tsereganya - Separate contending parties; umpire.
tsêrêma - as the sun; make a rough and loud sound.
tsêrêmêtsêga - ululate.
tseremetsegile - has ululated.
tsêrr - of great heat of the sun.
tserwe - has been taken; be married; has been married.
tseta - pull and fasten tightly, as a girdle; fasten up, as a napkin.
tsetalala - stand firm and immovable.
tsetaletse - has stood firm and immovable.
tsetêga - become pulled and fastened, as a girdle.
tsetegile - has become pulled and fastened, as a girdle.
tsetêla - has fastened for, as a baby's napkin.
tsetile - has fastened, as a baby's napkin.
tsetla - a gusset; Palmet juncaceae.
tsetlameditse - has throwna thing so that it may hang down over something else, as a rope over a beam.
tsetlamediwa - being thrown, etc., so as to hang down over something else, as a rope over a beam.
tsetlamêla - descend on the other side; hang over, or be suspended from.
tsetlametsa - throw a thing so that it may hang down over something else, as a rope over a beam.
tsetlametse - is hanging over or suspended from; has hung over, or is suspended from.
tsetlêla - graft.
tsêt6 - 9N-, Same as tshêt6, a carving; an engraving.
tsetsana COLL - (same as "tshetsana"), many female children. A generic term for female children.
tsêtsê - tsetse fly.
tsetse - has given birth to; has forgotten; has begotten.
tsetsea - become spoiled, as porridge that is kept overnight.
tsetseile - is spoiled, as food left overnight.
tsetseisa - cause to become spoiled, as food.
tsetseisitse - has caused to become spoiled, as food or brewed drink.
tsetseisiwa - being caused to become spoiled, as food or a beverage.
tsêtsêlêka - be prudent, circumspect, or watchful; look at earnestly.
tsetselekile - is prudent; circumspect, etc.; has become prudent.
tsêtsêlêk6 - 9n., rcumspection; prudence; watchfulness.
tsêtsêna - êtsêneka, work cleverly, or cunningly; be in large numbers.
tsêtsêneka - (same as "fsêtsêna"), work cleverly or cunningly; be in large numbers.
tsetsenekile - has worked cleverly, or cunningly.
tsetsenye - has worked cleverly or cunningly.
tsetsepeditse - has caused to stand firm; gave an assurance to.
tsetsepediwa - being caused to stand firm.
tsetsepêla - stand firm.
tsetsepetsa - cause to stand firm; give assurance to.
tsetsepetse - is standing firm; has given assurance to. \.
tsetsepetso - an assuranice. tsetseregana vV.s. REC. part, or become parted. asunder; split, or become split up, as wood.
tsetseregantsê - has caused to split; has split; has divided.
tsetsereganya - cause to split; split; divide.
tsetsereganye - has parted or become split.
tsêtsêtha - (same as "tshêtshêtha"), winnow.
tsetsethile - (same as "tshetshethile"), has winnowed.
tsetsho - s. for cLs.8 AND 10, Ours; belonging to us.
tsetswe - has been born.
tsêwa - being taken; being married.
tšha - dry up, as water in a pool.
tšhaama - be spread out, as water over a plain; overflow, as a full river.
tšhaame - has spread out, as water over a plain; has overflowed.
tšhaba - a tribe; a nation.
tšhaba - rise, as the sun, moon, etc.
tshaba - fear; run; be afraid; have diarrhoea.
tšhaba e sele - a foreigner; an alien. tshaba madi v.pPurR, have dysentery.
tšhabagantsê - has cut down the middle with an axe.
tšhabaganya - cut down the middle with an axe.
tshabana - fear each other.
tšhabantsê - has gushed.
tšhabanyatsêga - šhabanya, gush.
tšhabanyatsegile - has gushed out; has become gushed out.
tšhabany6 - a gush of water or words.
tshabêga - become feared.
tshabegile - be feared.
tshabêla - run to; escape to; desert from or to; flee from.
tshabetse - has escaped to; has sought refuge at.
tshabile - has escaped; has dreaded.
tshabisa - suffer from diarrhoea.
tshabisitse - has caused to fear; has frightened.
tshabisiwa - being frightened.
tshabiwa - being feared; being fled from; being shunned.
tshabôê - a flight; a fleeing.
tšhabu - of something plunging into water.
tšhabuetse - be plunged into water; has plunged into water.
tshadi COLL - a group of women; many women.
tšhaegile - has become spread.
tšhaêla - a large house.
tšhaetse - be late for work.
tšhafats6 - to renew.
tšhaile - has knocked off.
tšhaisa - knock off, from work; stop working.
tšhaisitse - has gone off duty; has stopped working.
tšhaisiwa - being at rest and not at work [borrowed].
tshajwa - (same as "tshabiwa"), being feared; being fled from; being shunned.
tšhaka - similar to tshêka, a battle axe; a sword.
tšhakgal6 - indignation; wrath; displeasure.
tšhalang - (same as "tšhelang and sefokaboleya"), snow; ice.
tshamekêga - be played; be playable.
tshamekegile - has been played successfully.
tshamekêla - take someone lightly.
tshameketse - has played for.
tshamekile - has played.
tshamekisa - cause or help to play; make fun of.
tshamekisitse - has poked fun at; has caused to play.
tshamekisiwa - being caused to play, etc.
tshamek6 - sport; fun.
tshamekwane - child's play.
tšhampa - s, denotes male animal that is red-brown mixed in small markings with white. nz. that the white and red spots may be of equal size, or more red with few white spots round the belly. tšhampana ap).s, denotes a female animal that has white and red spots of equal size, or more red with few white spots round the belly.
tšhankaneng - prison.
tšhanta - shunt; move up and down.
tsharabolola - comb out, as wool, tow or string; uncoil; untwist.
tsharabolotsê - has combed out, as wool, tow or string; has uncoiled.
tsharologa - become loose; come apart.
tsharologêla - come apart for.
tsharologile - has become loose; has come apart.
tsharolola - spread out, as a curtain, or awning.
tsharololôê - (same as "gareteng or gareteine"), an awning; a curtain [borrowed].
tshasa - smear, or rub with fat, etc.
tšhasama - probably same as gasama scatter.
tšhasame - be scattered; have scattered.
tshasana - Smear each other with oil paint, etc.
tshaseditse - has smeared a thing with fat, etc., for.
tshasediwa - being smeared with fat, etc.
tshasêga - become smeared.
tshasegile - has become smeared.
tshasetsa - smear, or rub with fat, etc., for.
tshasitse - has painted; has smeared.
tshasitswe - has been smeared on; has been painted.
tšhatšhalêga - expand.
tšhatšhalegile - has expanded.
tšhatšhama - -, have a fever; be off-colour; be ill.
tšhatšhanya - hiss or sizzle.
tšhatšhanyêga - hiss or sizzle; be burnt or fried.
tšhatšhanyegile - as fat when being fried; has sizzled, as fat when being burnt.
tšhawa - ash; support [archaic].
tšhaya - turn aside.
tshê - be to the point; fits exactly; se are fêla, se are tshê, it fits exactly; o a re tshê! he speaks to the point or purpose.
tshebelana - gather together; amass.
tshebelanye - have massed.
tshebetha - rub between the hands, as when braying.
tshebethile - has rubbed between the hands, as when braying.
tshebetso - a hint; a hinting to.
tshêb6 - slander; backbiting.
tšhedile - has rubbed a skin with a stone when beginning to bray it.
tshedile - (same as "tshetsê"), has cast, as the bones in divination; has poured.
tshedile - (same as "tshetse"), has forded a stream; has crossed over.
tshedilwe - (same as "tshetswê has been lived").
tshedilwe - (same as "tshetswe has been poured").
tshedisa - cause to live; keep alive; condole.
tshedisitse - has caused or helpedto live; has condoled or sympathised with the bereaved.
tshedisitse - has caused or helped to pour.
tshedisiwa - (same as "tshediswa"), being caused or helped to pour.
tshedisiwa - (same as "tshediswa"), being kept alive; being sympathised with on bereavement.
tshediwa - (same as "tshêlwa being poured").
tšhefi_ - a poison [borrowed].
tšhega - purge (actively); have diarrhoea.
tshêga - laugh; ridicule. prov., se tshêgê yo o oleng, mareledi a sa le pele.
tshega DER - s, denotes a male animal that is belted (in colour); striped at the waist.
tshega - similar to seope a strip of skin or oth worn by a boy to cover nakedness.
tshega ngangatswane - ¢, little boys when still at a stage when they are unashamed of their nakedness.
tshêgaka - feel extremely happy.:.
tshegak6 - cutting; laceration.
tshegana DER - S. denotes a female animal, particularly cattle, that is belted (in colour); striped at the waist.
tshêgana - laugh at one another.
tshegeditse - be holding fast; has kept, as a commandment.
tshegediwa - being held fast; being kept, as a commandment.
tšhêgêla - have diarrhoea at.
tshêgêla - laugh for.
tshegêla - arrange stones on which to place a pot.
tshêgêla teng - êga, smile with agreement; be in a contented state.
tshegeleditse - be holding fast for; has held fast for; is observing.
tshegelediwa - being held fast for; being kept for.
tshegeletsa - hold fast for; keep for; uphold for.
tshegetsa - uphold; keep, as a commandment; hold fast, as to faith or doctrine; detain; support; control.
tšhegetse - has purged on.
tshegetse - has laughed for, or at.
tšhegile - has had diarrhoea.
tshegile - has laughed.
tšhegisa - cause to have diarrhoea; cause to purge.
tšhegisitse - has caused purging.
tshegisitse - has caused to laugh.
tšhegisiwa - being made to purge.
tshegisiwa - being made to laugh.
tšhegiwa - being purged; having diarrhoea.
tshêg6 - 9N-, a laugh; laughter.
tsheg6 - a cutting; a cut.
tsheg6 - 9N-, contracted from Jesegd, used.
tshegofaditse - has made blessed, or happy; has blessed.
tshegofaditswe - has been blessed.
tshegofadiwa - being blessed.
tshegofala - become blessed, lucky, or happy.
tshegofaletsa - bless for.
tshegofaletse - being blessed for.
tshegofatsa - happy; bless.
tshegofats6 - a blessing; grace.
tshegofetse - has become blessed, lucky, or happy.
tšhêka - N., similar to tšhaka, a thing with a sharp edge; a battle axe; a sword.
tšheka - dodge, as an animal refusing to be caught.
tsheka - lie across; place a thing across.
tshekagana - lie across one another; be checked or chequered in colour or appearance.
tshekaganye - are lying across one another.
tshekatshek6 - an estimation; a judgement based on an examination; a critical appreciation; a testing.
t$hêkê - (For), cheque.
tshekêga - 9N-, i.e. the position a huge ay pot takes. Similar to tsaga, a large ay pot; a extra large pot; nickname for a drunkard.
tshekêga - lie across something at right angles.
tshekêgêla - êga, lie across something, for.
tshekegile - has lain across at right angles.
tshêkêl6 - a court for hearing cases.
tšhekile - as an animal refusing to be caught.
tshekile - has lain across.
tshekis6 - similar to katlholê which is more frequently used; a judgement; a condemnation.
tshêk6 - a legal cause; a prosecution; a place for judgement; a council.
tshêk6 - disc.
tšhêla - similar to thêla, rub a skin with a stone when braying at the beginning of the tanning process.
tshêla - pour; cast, as when the bones are cast in divination.
tshela - live; ford a stream, etc.; pass over; approach and retreat from, in dancing.
tshêla bola v - PHR, cast the bones in divination.
tšhêlang - (same as "tshalang"), snow; ice.
t8hêlê - (same as "tshwêlê"), a moth that eats skins.
tšhele - has dried up, as a pool, or spring. prov., bodiba bo tshele ke ntse ke bo lebile.
tsheledisa - similar to theledisa, cause to escape.
tsheledisitse - similar to theledisitse, has caused to escape.
tsheledisiwa - similar to theledisiwa, has been caused to escape.
tshelêga - be fordable.
tshêlêga - similar to thêlêga, be drainable; pourable, as a liquid; be poured out.
tshêlêgêla - similar to thêlêgêla, pour upon, as a flight of arrows; rush upon, as a number of people; arrive in large numbers.
tshelegetse - similar to thelegetse, have rushed upon, as a number of people; have arrived in large numbers.
tshelegile - similar to thelegile has become drained, or poured as a liquid.
tshêlêla - pour for.
tshêlêla - êla, same as thêlêla, bury.
tshelêla - live for; cross over to, for; seven.
tshêlêlêla - dig a thing under [borrowed]. 1D. Expr, go tshêlêlêla dithupa, to bear a grudge against.
tsheleletse - has dug under for.
tshelepana - differ, as stories, etc.
tshelepantsê - has caused dissension.
tshelepanye - have differed as stories, narratives, etc.
tšhêlêtê - ¢., ditshêlêtê, (For, money.
tsheletse - has lived for; has crossed over for, or to; (things) are seen in number.
tsheletse - (same as "theletse"), has poured for.
tshêl6 - a pouring; a mould for bullets, etc.
tshelopedi - 9N-, amphibian.
tshelwa - being unserved by a bull even though a former calf has been weaned; being uninseminated, when it would be in order to conceive.
tshema - to do with go sema, hence itshema. tshema pelo v.pur, feel low or bad.
tšhêmêg6 - 9n-, a cracking of the skin, leather rubber, etc.
tshemêgê - 9N-, a warning. tshemilepelo v.rur, has felt depressed; be feeling low or bad.
tšhemoga - break through, or away, and escape; become bald, or bare, through being shaved.
tšhêmogêla - or from.
tšhemogile - has broken through, or away, and escaped; has become bald, through being shaved.
tšhemola - make bald; shave off all the hair; break away; ecape.
tšhêmotsê - has made bald; has shaved off all the hair; has escaped; has broken away.
tsheng - AND INTER, Same as ka eng how; by what.
tshenolê - 9N-, a revelation.
tšhentšhi - -, change (small money); a change [borrowed].
tshenyêgêl6 - 9N-, an abortion; damage; expense; calamity; stillbirth.
tshenyêg6 - 9N-, destruction.
tsheny6 - an impregnating (of a female who is not one's wife); waste; destruction.
tsheny6 leina - leina libel.
tshêpa - (same as "itshêpa"), become pure or sanctified; trust (actively); have confidence; rely on.
tshêpana - trust one another.
tshêpê - 9N-, a springbok.
tshêpêga - become sanctified; become pure; be trustworthy; be reliable.
tshepêgêla - become trustworthy in, or to.
tshepegetse - has been trustworthy to, or in.
tshepegile - has proved reliable; has been reliable.
tshêphêrêga - scold continually; walk about; travel widely.
tshepheregile - has travelled widely.
tshepile - has trusted.
tshepisa - promise.
tshepisitse - has promised.
tshepisiwa - being made a promise; being promised.
tshepiwa - being promised; being trusted.
tshêp6 - trust; confidence; a hope.
tshera - as game.
tšhere - ¢-, a tarantula (spider).
tshere - 9N-, a trapdoor.
tshereana - foolish, or dazed.
tshereantsê - has made stupid; has dazed; has charmed or fascinated, as a snake.
tshereanya - make stupid; daze; charm or fascinate, as a snake; stupify.
tshereanye - be stupid foolish, or dazed.
tshêrêma - (same as "tsêrêma"), make a rough and loud sound.
tsheremile - has made a rough and loud sound.
tšhêrêtlêgana - see also tshwêrêtla, be extremely rotten.
tšhêrêtlêganôê - 9n-, rottenness.
tšhêrêtlêganye - (same as "tshwêrêtlanye"), has become very septic, as a wound; has become very soft, as overcooked food.
tsheru - baboon spider very poisonous.
tšhesa - cause to dry up.
tshesane - s., used for cts.8,9 AND 10,Same as sesane, thin; fine; slender.
tšhêšê - 9N-, same as sethunya, flower, of any kind; a plant with edible flowers, like marigolds.
tshêsêbê - (same as "kabole"), Danaliscus lunatus, commonly called tshêsêbê; a railway station on the northsouth line of Botswana.
tšhesele - 9-, chisel [borrowed].
tshêtêtla - 9N-, same as sebêtlêla or pêtlêla, a wood shaving.
tšhêtla - (same as "tšhwetla"), crush. N.B.v.s. DER. will be found under tshwetla.
tshetledi - 9N-, anchor.
tšhêtlha - s,, yellow. Denotes a male animal that is tawny, or light khaki in colour.
tshetlha - s., yellow. Denotes a male animal that is tawny, or light khaki in colour.
tshêtlhana - s. Denotes a female animal that is tawny, or light khaki in colour.
tshêtlhê - 9N-, same as mosêtlhê a thorn of the marshmallow or dubbeltjiedoring plant, a ground creeper with yellow flowers and sharp thorns.
tshêtlhê - 9n-, same as mosêtlhê, the honeyguide; a bird that leads to a bees' nest; a bird that is believed to lead to the lair of some dangerous animal.
tshetlolosa - lower, or let down.
tshetlolositse - has lowered or let down.
tshetsa - cause to live; keep alive; maintain.
tshetsana cCOLL - many female children; a generic term for female children.
tshetsha - a change of residence; a stage in a journey.
tshêtshêtha - winnow.
tshetshethegile - has become winnowed.
tshêtshêthile - has winnowed.
tshetshethisitse - has helped to winnow.
tshetshethisiwa - being caused to winnow.
tshetshethiwa - êtshethwa being winnowed.
tshetswê - has been poured.
tshi - 1D., expressive of cold; how cold it is.
tshiamêl6 - 9N-, a right.
tshiamis6 - 9N-, restitution; justice.
tshiam6 - righteousness; justness; justice.
tshiamololê - unrighteousness; wickedness; injustice.
tshianôê - a race.
tšhiba - (same as "khiba pinafore"),; an apron.
tshiba - dig out.
tshiba - (same as "thiba"), plug; stop.
tšhibile - has dug out.
tshibile - has plugged.
tshibithi - a man who dances like a fool.
tshidi - a bean of the mositsane plant; the meconium of newborn infants; first faeces of newborn infants (dark in colour).
tshidilê - pressing iron.
tshika - a generation; a lineage; a blood vessel; a vein; an artery.
tshikarê - a resting place for a burden; a shoulder on which a burden is carried.
tshikatshika - generation to generation.
tshikhi - expressive of cold; brr, it's cold.
tshikhinngwa - being shaken.
tshikhintsê - has shaken; has moved.
tshikhintswê - has been shaken.
tshikhinya - shake; move.
tshikhinyeditse - has become shaken for.
tshikhinyediwa - (same as "tshikhinyetswa"), being shaken for.
tshikhinyêga - become shaken.
tshikhinyegile - has become shaken.
tshikhinyetsa - shake for; move for.
tshikiri - 9N-,a little lump or swelling sometines seen above the navel. 1D. EXPR, motho yo o tshikiri, a glutton.
tshikitshane - 9N-,a species of grass with white flower, used for thatching.
tšhiladitse - has killed in large numbers.
tšhiladiwa - being killed in large numbers.
tšhilala - be killed in large numbers.
tšhilatsa - kill in large numbers.
tšhiletse - have been killed in large numbers.
tshilê - a mill; around stone for grinding with; the upper millstone.
tshilwana_ - a round stone for grinding with; millstone.
tshilwane - a species of lapwing; a cape sparrow.
tshilwê - 9N-., a species of lapwing.
tshima - boiled corn rubbed or ground in a mortar.
tshimane COLL - many male children; a generic term for male children.
tshimêga - 9N-, probably the main body or centre of an army; a mark made on the body of a warrior to indicate that he has killed an enemy; the leveller; the hero.
tshimo - and masimo, a ploughing field; a garden.
tshimologê - 9N-, the beginning; the origin.
tshinos6 - a manifestation; a revelation; an exposure.
tšhipa - cheap.
tshipa - ¢, AND N.and ditshipa, small spotted genet; rusty spotted genet. prov., bana ba tshipa ba tsaya tsela e le nngwe fêla, fa ba kgaogana ke baso ba mogotlha.
tshipi - iron; metal; a bell; Sunday, same as Sontaga; a week, same as beke.; tshipi di a tsidima 1p.exrr, the bells are ringing [borrowed].
tshipidi - 9N., a child's unsteady walk; a child's lessons, learning to walk.
tšhipile - be cheap.
tšhipisa - reduce the price.
tšhipisi - 9N-., potato chip [borrowed].
tšhipisise - has reduced the price.
tšhipisiwa - being made cheap and inexpensive.
tshipo - ¢, a spring hare.
tshira - (same as "lesire"), a veil.
tshira - throw protection on; rarely used.
tshireletsê - protection; guardianship; Lefatse ja Tshireletsd, the Protectorate.
tshirile - (same as "sirile which is more frequently used"),; has thrown protection on.
tšhisa - dry up; cause to dry up.
tšhisi - -, (FoR), cheese.
tshisibal6 - a calm; a deep silence; deadlock.
tshisimog6 - reverence; devoutness; awe; gravity; respectful fear. mn. EXPR, ka tshisimogêd, solemnly, carefully and gravely.
tshisiri - a fishmoth.
tšhisitse - has caused to dry up.
tshisêpelo - a sigh; a sob.
tshitabotlhole - n., antidote. tshitamodum6 ReEL.s., soundproof.
tshitatutêl6 - 9-, ING. oF ditshitatutêld antiseptic.
tshitêg6 - a trance; a state of collapse.
tshitêgê ya pelo - heart failure.
tshitlha - exude or 00ze; tshitlha metsi pespire; tshitlha madi, bleed from the pores.
tshitlhê - 9N., a traditional doctor's medicine, with the appearance of black gum; charms. tshitsha pelo v. pur, ease the heart.
tšhitšhimêla - dry up.
tšhitšhimetse - has dried up. tshitshitse pelo v.rur, has eased the heart.
tsho - ExPR, of blackness, or darkness.
tšhêba - (same as "sdtlha"), stamp earth in around a pole; press; pedal.
tšhêbana - push one another; give each other a ride on a bicycle. tšhêbêga _v.s. eur, become stamped, as grain that is being teased out of the husks.
tshobêga - become thin, of liquids.
tšhobegile - has become stamped; has become pressed in.
tšhobegile - has become thin of liquids.
tšhbêla - press in, as grain into a bag; press down, as bushes with a pronged stick.
tshobera - stir up, as dirt in water; poke.
tshoberêga - become stirred up, as dirt in water.
tshoberegile - be stirred up as dirt in water; has become stirred up, as dirt in water.
tšhêbetsa - have projectile vomiting.
tšhôbêtsêga - come out suddenly, as out of a house, or blood from a wound.
tšhobokana - similar to sobokana, come together; gather together into one.
tšhobokanê6 - the sum total; a throng (of people).
tšhobokantsê - (same as "sobokantsê"), has gathered.
tšhobokanya - has caused to sum up.
tšhobokanye - (same as "sobokanye"), has come together.
tšhobokany6 - a summing up, of numbers; a bringing into a whole of different parts.
tshodile - (same as "tshotsê"), has served food.
tshodisa - assist; help; take up one side of a load; help to bear a burden; cause a woman to bear children; impregnate a woman.
tshodisa - cause or help to serve food.
tshodisantsê - have helped one another to bear a child (said of man and woman who have illicit sexual intercourse).
tshodisantsê - have helped one another to serve food.
tshodisanya - help one another to bear a burden; bear each other's burden; bear children together, even though not legally married.
tshoga - be frightened; be terrified; be scared.
tshogana DER - (same as "tshokana"), suddenly; surprisingly and without any warning; unexpectedly; ba tshogana ka ba go bêna, they suddenly saw you.
tshogana - distrust each other; envy one another's position.
tshoganeditse - found one inopportunely; has come upon one most unexpectedly.
tshoganediwa - being found doing, saying, etc., inopportunely.
tshoganetsa - come upon suddenly; happen unexpectedly.
tshoganetso - suddenness; ka tshoganetso, ADV. OF MAN, suddenly.
tshogêla - fear for; show concern for; worry over.
tshogetse - be fearing for; has feared for.
tshogologa - revive; be refreshed; be set up afresh.
tshogologile - has revived; has become refreshed.
tshogolosa - cause to revive or refresh; help to set afresh.
tshogolositse - has revived; has refreshed.
tshogolosiwa - being revived; being set up afresh.
tshogomoga - Start; be startled.
tshogomogile - was startled; is startled.
tshêka - earwax.
tshêka - be eager, as a bull.
tshêkam6 - crookedness; evil; immorality; perversity.
tshokana DER - (same as "tshogana"), suddenly; surprisingly and without any warning; ba tshokana ka ba go bêna, they suddenly saw you.
tshêkêg6 - become dislocated.
tshokile - has become eager, as a bull.
tšhdkôlêtê - n., (ror) chocolate.
tshokologê - a turning; a twisting, as of a joint; turning over a new leaf.
tshokolog6 ya letsatsi - PHR OFT.,Same as maitsebowa, in the afternoon.
tshokologê ya ngwaga - PHR. oFT, the turn of the year.
tshokotsêga - swirl as smoke.
tshola - (same as "fsholo"), hard fat for smearing skins; eye salve.
tshola - bear a child; give birth; hold; receive, as a host a guest.
tshola - serve food; serve a meal.
tshôlê - (same as "tshwêlê a moth that eats skins"), etc.
tshole - a lump of wax, or grease.
tsholeditse - has lifted up; has taken up.
tsholediwa - being lifted up.
tsholêla - dish up for; take out food for; serve a meal.
tsholêla - give birth for, or at.
tsholeleditse - has lifted up for.
tsholelediwa - being lifted up for.
tsholeletsa - lift up for, or to.
tsholetsa - lift up; Botswana Democratic Party slogan.
tsholetse - has given birth for or at; has held for.
tsholetse - has served food for.
tsholetsêga - be lifted up; become lifted up.
tsholetsêgêla - êga, be lifted for.
tsholetsegile - be lifted; has become lifted up.
tsholofêlê - 1D. ExPR Tsholofêlê ga e tlhabise ditlhong.
tsholofetso - a promise.
tshologa - (same as "thologa"), overflow; become spilt.
tshologêla - (same as "thologêla"), rush out to; rush on; run to, as a crowd does; be spilt, or poured out for.
tshologile - (same as "thologile has overflowed"),; has become spilt.
tshologê - a spilling; an overflowing.
tsholola - have diarrhoea (as a baby).
tsholola - (same as "tholola"), spill; shed, as blood; pour out.
tshololêla - (same as "thololêla shed"), as blood, for; spill for.
tshololetse - (same as "thololetse"), has shed for, as blood.
tsholotsê - (same as "tholotsê has spilled"),; has shed.
tšhêma - speak a foreign language; talk a language imperfectly understood by the hearers; talk a language badly.
tšhome - s., used of a person who allows a stray animal to go on wandering.
tshomefatsê DEv - decimalisation.
tšhomi - a foreign language; a language imperfectly spoken or known.
tšhomile - has spoken in a foreign language, etc.
tšhomola - (same as "tšhêmola"), come out of the grip of.
tshomolê - extraction.
tšhomolola - interpret.
tšhomolotsê - has interpreted.
tšhêna - become poor.
tšhona - 1ST. PERS. PL., Same as rona which is more commonly used, we; us.
tšhdênêl6 - a groan; a moan.
tshonolê - a leading by the ear.
tshêpany6 - (same as "tshobokê"), the sum; the summary.
tshopeleditse - has twisted or wound something round an object.
tshêpha - turn up spirally; twist upwards; curl; be twisted, as a leather towrope.
tshêphagantsê - has given the summary; has entangled.
tshêphaganya - give a summary; entangle.
tshêphantsê - short form of tshdphagantsê, has summed up; has given the summary.
tshêphanya - short form of tshdphaganya, give the summary; sum up.
tshêphêla - twist upwards for; curl for; be twisted, as a leather towrope for.
tshophelediwa - being twisted or wound round an object.
tshêphêlêla - twist or wind; make spiral.
tshopheletsa - twist or wind a thing round something.
tshopheletse - has twisted or wound; has made a spiral.
tshopheletswe - has been twisted or wound round and round; has been made a spiral.
tshophologa - become untwisted.
tshophologile - has become untwisted.
tshopholola - unwind.
tshopholotsê - has unwound, etc.
tshosa - a spear.
tshosa - startle; astonish; frighten; alarm.
tshosabanna - a kind of quail.
tshosana - alarm each other.
tshoseditse - has frightened for.
tshosediwa - being frightened for.
tshosetsa - frighten for.
tshositse - has frightened.
tshosiwa - being frightened, or alarmed.
tshos6 - terror; alarm.
tshosobagan6 - confusion; a wrinkle, or crease.
tshosologa - come into the open.
tshosologile - has become frank; has come into the open.
tshosolog6 - without fear; frankness; openness; a coming into the open; a putting of all cards upon the table.
tshosolosa - cause of frankness of speech; cause of openness of conduct; bring into the light of things hidden.
tshosolositse - has caused frankness of speech, etc.
tshoswane - the generic term for ant; any ant; the common red or black ant. 1p. Expr, molato o sêkêlwa ke ditshoswane.
tshotlêgê6 - suffering.
tšhêtlha - similar to thhafuna, chew; chew.
tshotlhaka - chew thoroughly.
tshêtlhêga - be chewable; become chewed.
tshotlhegile - has become chewed.
tshotlhêla - chew for.
tshotlhetse - has chewed for.
tshotlhisitse - has caused to chew.
tshotlhisiwa - being caused to chew.
tshotlhiwa - being chewed.
tšhdtlhê - 9n-,same as leswabi, dry sweet reed.
tšhôtlh6 - (same as "seswaa and tshwaiwa"),. meat that has become minced while cooking.
tshotl6 - mockery; scorn.
tshotša - s., hornless, used of male cattle.
tshotšana - s., hornless, used of female cattle.
tshotsê - has received; has accepted; has taken; has given birth.
tshotsê - has served food; has served a meal.
tšhôtšhômêla - rush upon, as in battle or play; fight hand to hand.
tšhotšhêmetse - has rushed upon, as in battle or play; has fought hand to hand.
tshotswa - s, ordinary; having no horns.
tshotswê - has been received or welcomed, in the case of visitors.
tshotswê - has been served, as a meal.
tshu - used to exclaim a sensation of heat, i.e. when burnt by something.
tshuba - set fire to; burn up; light a torch or candle; blister or gall, as a rope the hand; blast, as frost the crops.
tshubaba - a burn mark on the skin; moral weakness.
tshubêga - become excoriated; become peeled, as skin; be inflammable; become burnt up.
tshubegile - has become burnt; was inflammable.
tshubêg6 - a burning; blasting; blight; drought.
tshubêla - set fire to, or for.
tshubetse - has burnt at, or for.
tshubetswe - has been burnt at, or for.
tshubile - has lit up; has burnt up; has blasted, etc.; has branded cattle.
tshubilwe - has been lit or burnt; has been branded.
tshubisa - cause or help to set on fire; help to light a candle or torch.
tshubisitse - has caused to set a thing on fire, etc.
tshubisiwa - being caused to set a thing on fire, etc.
tshubiwa - being burnt up; being lit, etc.
tshuge - the work of braying skins when finished; the time for putting a brayed skin into the colouring tub.
tshuge - an erect geophyte arising from a small globose corm covered with a tunic of fine brown fibres edible species of Jridaceae including Babiana hupogea.
tshugd - the braying of skins.
tshuisa - compensate; satisfy as with payment; pay part of damages.
tshuisitse - has compensated; has paid part of damages.
tshuisiwa - being made to compensate; being made to pay part of damages.
tshujwa - (same as "tshubiwa being burnt"),; being lit.
tshukatshukan6 - or contention involving a group of people.
tshukatshuk6 - strife; contention.
tshukhu prRIM - (same as "ftshu"), used to exclaim a sensation of heat.
tshukudu - 9N-, a rhinoceros; generic term for rhinoceros. prov., € ka bo e le tshukudu e ka bo e ntlhabile.
tshukudu ya temo - tractor.
tshula - s, DER. F. bosula, evil; pelo e tshula, an evil heart.
tshulafalêl6 - a distaste; a nasty feeling; loss of appetite.
tshulatsôê - an evil influence.
tshumê - s., thick, as porridge; closely compacted.
tshum6 - a rushing sound, or noise.
tshumpula - lash with the tail, as an iguana.
tshumpulaka - lash severely with the tail.
tshumpulakile - has lashed severely with the tail.
tshumputsê - has lashed with the tail, as an iguana. tshumu ap1.s., indicates a white marking on forehead and on the face, often continued down to the dewlap and belly, of a male animal.
tshumu khubidu - pur, indicates colour as described under tshurnu but with the rest of the hide being red-brown. nz. refers to male animals only.
tshumu phifadu - pur, indicates tshumu but with the rest of the hide being black. ns. refers to male animals only.
tšhuni - ING. oF ditšhuni, tune [borrowed].
tshunyana - s, indicates a white marking on forehead and on the face (may only be a streak of white or a white V on the forehead), often continued down to the dewlap and belly. ns. used of female animals only.
tshupa - a weevil. I. EXxPR, mabêlê a tshupa, last year's corn; maoto a tshupa, slow-footed one, as a slow horse.
tshupafelê - 9N-, map.
tshupakotsi - 99-, beacon. _tshupane N. -, a tip; the magnetised point on a compass.
tshupantlha - compass.
tshupêlêl6 - 9N-, meat, or medicine, given as traditional medicine; an offering.
tshupêlêlê ya boleo - a propitiation.
tshupêlê - an offering; a sacrifice.
tshupetso - a manifestation.
tshup6 - %-, record; proof; evidence; testimony; a show.
tšhupu_ - tube [borrowed].
tshuse - a species of wild, edible crocus.
tshusu - s, lean, used of meat.
tshuti - 9N-, shadow of a oud; state of being overcast.
tshutifala - become overcast; be cloudy.
tshutifalêla - overcast, as a cloud.
tshutifaletse - has become overshadowed, as by a cloud.
tshutlha - a thicket.
tshutshu - REP., Same as fshu, used to exclaim a sensation of heat.
tshutshwa_ - a syphilitic sore or ulcer. tšhwa pri. INTERs., used in calling a dog to come and take something; come here and take.
tshwa-tshwantsê - has rustled.
tshwaa - mark.
tshwaana - s, a white cow.
tshwabi - any dried food; raisins; dried berries of wild currant bushes.
tshwabê - any augury; a guess; a fading; a flagging; a withering.
tshwaêga - become branded; be distinguishable.
tšhwaêla - ¢-, a comment.
tshwaêla - set apart for, as a father for his children; brand for and give to; brand for.
tshwaêl6 - a portion given by a father to his children in his lifetime.
tshwaetsa - probably per F. tshwaya infect, as one with a contagious disease.
tshwaetse - has branded for; has given a cow, goat, etc.
tshwaetso - a tightening of the knot.
tshwaetso - infection.
tshwaetso - having cramps.
tshwaetswe - has been branded for; has been given a cow, goat, etc., to.
tshwafal6 - 9N-,a desolation.
tšhwafats6 - 9N., a desolating; a cause of desolation.
tshwaile - has branded marked, etc.
tshwailwe - has been branded marked, etc.
tshwaisa - similar to tshwaêla help or cause to brand; set apart for, as a father for his children.
tshwaisitse - has caused to brand; has set apart for, as a father for his children.
tshwaisitswe - has been caused to brand; has been set apart for, as a father for his children.
tshwaisiwa - being caused to brand; being helped to set apart, as a father for his children.
tshwaiwa - (same as "tshdtlhê and seswaa meat that has become minced while cooking").
tshwaiwa - being branded; being marked, etc.
tshwakgafala - become lazy, slow or lethargic.
tshwakgafatsa - cause to become lazy, etc.
tshwakgafetse - be lazy, or slow; has become lazy, slow or lethargic.
tshwakgoga - be indulged.
tshwakgogile - has become spoiled; has become accustomed to being given things.
tshwakgola - have a preference for.
tshwakgotsê - have a preference; se mo tshwakgotsê, it has his preference.
tshwakgotswê - having a preference; ke tshwakgotswê ke nama, I have a preference for meat.
tshwana - s, describes a black cow OTF ewe, etc.
tshwana - be alike; look alike; be similar. Tshwane Nn. CcL.99-, Pretoria (Tshwane wa Mmamelodi).
tshwaneditse - has made to fit well and snugly, as clothing that has been carefully selected or tailored.
tšhwamoga - break through, or away and escape.
tšhwamogile - has broken through, or away, and escaped.
tshwanediwa - being made to look exquisite in.
tshwanêla - be fitting; be worthy; be proper.
tshwanêla - should; ought; must; need to.
tshwanêl6 - a duty; an obligation; a right.
tshwanêlwa - being worthy of; being filled well by, or to.
tshwanetsa - make worthy of; cut or knock off a corner; cut a piece of meat from a joint [archaic].
tshwanetse - ought; have; must have; should have; o tshwanetse go dira, you should, ought, or must do.
tshwanetse - has become worthy, fitting or proper.
tshwanetswe - has been worthy of; has been proper for; deserved; was deserving of.
tshwang - dry grass; hay. tshwang phofu api.s,, red.
tshwan6 - similar to setshwand, the image of a thing.
tshwanologa - become altered or different; lose former figure or appearance.
tshwanolog6 - 9N-, a difference; a change in appearance.
tshwanolola - make different; alter.
tshwanolotsê - has made different; has altered.
tshwantsha - compare; liken; make or cause to be alike; take a picture; photograph; draw.
tshwantshanngê - duplicate; making an imitation.
tshwantshany6 - 99-, comparison; analogy.
tshwantsheditse - has photographed for; has drawn for, etc.
tshwantshediwa - being photographed for, etc.
tshwantshetsa - etc.
tshwantshisa - cause or help to photograph; help to compare.
tshwantshisitse - has caused to compare; has helped to photograph, etc.
tshwantshisiwa - being caused or helped to draw; being caused to compare; being made alike; being taken a picture of.
tshwantshisôê - 99-, metaphor.
tshwantshitse - has photographed; has compared or likened; has drawn.
tshwantshiwa - being compared or made alike; being photographed; being drawn.
tshwantshêmotlae - 9N-, cartoon.
tshwantshôêteng - 9N-, x-ray.
tshwapeditse see tswapeditse - threshed cane lightly.
tshwapetsa - see tswapetsa thresh cane lightly.
tshwara - seize, hence take care of; arrest.
tshwaragana - as by hooking; stand by each other; help one another; co-operate; join together.
tshwaraganêla - cooperate in doing a task.
tshwaraganetse - have mutual assistance; are mutually assisting each other; are co-operating.
tshwaragan6 - 99-, join together.
tshwaragantsê - has joined things together; has officiated at a marriage; be near to each other; be in close touch with.
tshwaraganya - do a thing with difficulty; make do with odds and ends; link, connect or join.
tshwaratshwara - manipulate; touch or feel with the hands; take temporary and poorly paying employment.
tshwaratshwere - has handled, etc.
tshwarêga - become seized; be very busy.
tshwarêgêla - êga, be busy for.
tshwaregile - be very busy; has found no way out.
tshwarêla - hold for; stand in for.
tshwarêlêla - êga, hold on to for; assist a calf to suckle from a cow not its mother; act as a regent; deputise for.
tshwareletse - has held on for.
tshwarisa - cause one to be arrested.
tshwarisetsa - cause one to be arrested for.
tshwarisitse - has caused one to be apprehended; has helped to carry.
tshwarisiwa - being helped to carry a thing; being caused to be arrested.
tshwarê - a catch; an arrest.
tshwarwa - being arrested.
tshwaswa - a sore on a child's lip.
tshwatshwa - a fashion or shape.
tshwatshwaetse - has fashioned or shaped a thing.
tshwatshwanya - rustle; make a rustling noise.
tshwaya - brand an animal; mark in any way as a sign of ownership; mark a script and award marks.
tshweka - elude; lift up and throw down in wrestling; be too much for.
tshwekantsê - has mixed things up.
tshwekanya - mix things up.
tshwekanya mafoko v - PHR, mix up matters in talking.
tshwekile - has eluded; has lifted up and thrown down, in wrestling; has been too much for.
tshwêlê - 9N-, a destructive hairy moth that eats skins, etc.
tshwene - ¢, AND and ditshwene, a baboon; totem of the Bahurutshe and Batlhware. prov, tshwene e are go Sae re e bona pilo e sie.
tshwenngwa - being vexed, or bothered; being worried.
tshwentsê - has vexed, or bothered; has worried.
tshwentswê - has been vexed, bothered, or worried.
tshwenya - tease; trouble; vex; worry.
tshwenyana - (same as "tshwenyetsanya tease one another").
tshwenyeditse - has troubled, or worried for.
tshwenyediwa - being vexed, or troubled for.
tshwenyêga - be troubled; be worried; be vexed.
tshwenyêgêla - êla, be troubled over, or for.
tshwenyegile - has become troubled; was worried, or vexed.
tshwenyeg6 - trouble; worry; problem.
tshwenyetsa - trouble for.
tshwenyetsantsê - have teased one another; have troubled or worried one another.
tshwenyetsanya - (same as "tshwenyana tease one another"),; trouble, or worry one another.
tshweny6 - a teasing; a trouble; a worry.
tshwere - has seized; laid hold of, etc.; has arrested. prov., legodu ke le le tshwerweng ka merwalê.
tshwerea - slow to take up a job; leave a job before it is finished [arcny.
tshwereila - was slow to take up a job.
tshwêrêtlha - become septic; become soft, as overcooked food, or putrid meat.
tshwêrêtlhana - become very soft, as overripe fruit, etc.
tshwêrêtlhanye - has become very septic, as a wound; has become very soft, as overcooked food.
tshwêrêtlhêga - be in a state of tenderness, as well-cooked meat.
tshweretlhegile - has become tender, as well-cooked meat, or a festering wound.
tshweretlhile - has become soft, as overcooked food or putrid meat; has become septic.
tshweretlhisitse - has made a wound septic; has made fruit overripe, soft and tender.
tshweretlhisiwa - being made to become soft, as overcooked food.
tshwerwe - has been seized; has been arrested; being laid hold of; ke tshwerwe ke tlala, 1 am hungry; ke tshwerwe ke lenyêra, 1 am thirsty; ke tshwerwe ke mala, I have stomach trouble.
tšhwetla - crush.
tšhwetlaka - or many things.
tšhwêtlêga - be crushable; be crushed.
tšhwetlegile - has become crushed.
tšhwêtlêla - crush for.
tšhwetletse - has crushed for.
tšhwetlisa - cause or help to crush.
tšhwetlisitse - has been helped to crush.
tšhwetlisiwa - being helped to crush.
tšhwetliwa - white, used of male animals and things; used with Nn. oF cL.8 AND 10; other classes use sweu.
tshwinyane - s, same as tshunyana which is more commonly used; white-faced, or throated, female cattle.
tšhwisa - (same as "tshuisa compensate"),; pay part of damages.
tšhwisitse - (same as "tšhuisitse has satisfied"), as with payment; has paid part of damages.
tšhwisiwa - (same as "txhuisitse being compensated").
tshwiti - 9N-, same as tshuti shadow of a oud.
tsiakantsê - has repeated a story imperfectly.
tsiakanya - repeat a story imperfectly.
tsiakanya mafoko vers - PHR, to mince words.
tsiane - a species of very small, non-migratory locust.
tsiang - refers to colour or distinguishing marks of an animal; it also asks the sex of a young animal.
tsiba - (same as "thiba and tshiba"), stop a hole; plug; cork, etc.
tsibala - (same as "thibêga"), become plugged, corked or stopped up.
tsibegile - has struck a person very hard.
tsibikeditse - has thrown into a tremor; has caused convulsions.
tsibikediwa - being thrown into a tremor; being made giddy.
tsibikêla - be in a tremor; be giddy; tremble; feel faint; be unsteady, totering and confused.
tsibikeletse - has trembled for.
tsibiketsa - throw into a tremor; convulse, or cause convulsions.
tsibiketse - has had a tremor; has trembled.
tsibikêtsêga - be convulsed; be in convulsions.
tsibiketsêgêla - êtsêga, be convulsed for.
tsibiketsegile - has become convulsed.
tsiboga - regain consciousness; wake up troubled, or startled; wake oneself up; rouse up, or become roused up, as a lazy person.
tsiboga - strain.
tsibogile - has regained consciousness.
tsibolola - (same as "thibolola and kabolola uncork"),; unplug.
tsibolola - catch (of a trap).
tsibolotsê - has unplugged; has uncorked.
tsibosa - cause to startle.
tsibositswe - has been startled.
tsibosiwa - being startled.
tsididi - similar to seramê, cold.
tsidifaditse - has made cold or cool; has caused a sickness to abate.
tsidifaditswe - has made cold, or cool; has caused to abate, as a sickness.
tsidifadiwa - (same as "tsidifatswa"), being made cold or become cooled; being caused to abate, as a sickness.
tsidifala - become cold, or cool; abate (of sickness).
tsidifalêla - refresh; recover from sickness; die at.
tsidifalêlwa - being refreshed, or recovered from sickness.
tsidifaletse - has refreshed; _ has died at.
tsidifaletswe - has been refreshed.
tsidifatsa - cool; make cold or cool; cause to abate, as sickness.
tsidifetse - has become cold; has abated (of sickness).
tsidiki - ExPR, same as tsiriki, clanking.
tsidima - tinkle, or ring, as a bell.
tsidimile - as a bell.
tsie - OLL. PL., locust. PRov., tsie e fofa ka moswang.
tsie badimo - < ditsie badimo nonsensical talk; daydreams.
tsieditse - has deceived, or cheated.
tsieditswe - has been deceived, or cheated.
tsiediwa - (same as "tsietswa being deceived"), or cheated.
tsiekgopê - 9N-, grasshopper.
tsiêla - deceive; cause to doubt.
tsielêga - be deceived; be in doubt.
tsielegile - similar to tsietsêga be in doubt; be at a loss; has become deceived.
tsiêlwa - being perplexed; being deceived; being caused to doubt.
tsientshane - a species of grasshopper, or locust.
tsientshwane - 9N-, same as boijane, a grasshopper.
tsietsa - deceive; cheat; beguile; seduce.
tsietsana - (same as "fsietsanya"), deceive, or cheat each other.
tsietsantsê - (same as "tsietsanye"), has deceived or have cheated each other.
tsietsanya - (same as "tsietsana deceive"), or cheat each other.
tsietsanye - have deceived, or cheated each other.
tsiêtsêga - be deceived, or cheated; become puzzled; be beguiled.
tsietsêgêla - êtsêga, become puzzled over.
tsietsegetse - has become puzzled over.
tsietso - deceit; deceitfulness; cheating; fraud.
tsikana - fight at close quarters.
tsikantsê - has fought at close quarters.
tsikantswê - has been made to fight at close quarters.
tsikinngwa - beng shaken, or moved.
tsikintswê - has been shaken or moved.
tsikinya - (same as "tshikhinya"), shake, or move a thing.
tsikinyeditse - has shaken a thing for.
tsikinyediwa - (same as "tsikinyetswa"), being shaken for. be shakeable.
tsikinyêgêla - êga, become shaken for, or to.
tsikinyegile - be shaken; has become shaken.
tsikitla - tickle; poke in the ribs, in sport.
tsikitlana - tickle each other.
tsikitlêga - become tickled, amused, etc.
tsikitlegile - has become tickled.
tsikitlêla - be giddy.
tsikitlile - has tickled.
tsikitlilwe - has been tickled.
tsikitlisa - cause or help to tickle.
tsikitlisitse - has helped to tickle.
tsikitlisiwa - (same as "tsikitliswa"), being caused to tickle.
tsikitlwa - (same as "tsikitliwa"), being tickled.
tsile - (same as "file"), has or have arrived.
tsilwe - a species of small jackal.
tsilwe - (same as "¢lilwe"), arrival has been achieved.
tsimo - ExPR, of snorting.
tsimodisa - cause to pour out in large quantities; cause to snort.
tsimoga - be poured out in large quantities; stream out; flow abundantly.
tsimogile - has streamed out; has flowed abundantly.
tsimola - snort; tut-tut, in contempt.
tsimolana - snort at each other.
tsimolêla - snort at.
tsimoletse - has snorted at for.
tsimolwa - being snorted at.
tsimotsê - has snorted; has tuttutted in contempt.
tsina - a mouse's nest; a drink made of fruit and water; honey; syrup.
tsinêlêla - press a stooping person down to the ground.
tsineletse - has pressed a stooping person down to the ground.
tsininikane - (same as "senanatswi"), rain frog.
tsioga - shudder, as when cold water is thrown on one; shrink back, or be startled, as at the sight of a snake.
tsiogile - has shrunk back, or startled, as at the sight of a snake.
tsipalala - (same as "tsepalala"), stand upright.
tsipaletse - (same as "tsepaletse has stood upright").
tsipoga - shudder, or shrink back.
tsipola - startle, or cause to shudder.
tsipotsê - has startled, or causeq to shudder.
tsiri - as a bell, or a coin; of tinkling.
tsirigantsê - (same as "tsereganya"), has mediated; has umpired.
tsiriganya - (same as "fsereganya"), mediate; umpire.
tsirikanya - has clattered.
tsiriki - tinkling.
tsirima - ang; ring, as a bell.
tsirimile - has clanged; has rung, as a bell.
tsiritsiri - 9N-, a species of cricket.
tsisa - (same as "¢lisa"), bring.
tsiseditse - (same as "tliseditse has brought for").
tsisediwa - (same as "¢lisediwa and tsisetswa"), being brought for, or to.
tsisetsa - (same as "flisetsa"), bring for.
tsisitse - (same as "ftlisitse"), has brought.
tsisiwa - (same as "flisiwa"), being brought.
tsisôpelo - 9N-, same as tshisôpelo, a sigh; a sob.
tsitêg6 - (same as "tshitêgd failure"),; a state of collapse; a trance.
tsitêgd ya pelo - (same as "tshitêgd ya pelo"), a trance; heart failure. tsitla_N. N., the flag, or rush plant.
tsitla - be on the verge of crying; ooze out; cause to ache.
tsitla - become stale, or musty.
tsitla - (same as "nyatsa"), despise.
tsitla marap6 v - pHR, shudder.
tsitlama - making a wry face after eating or drinking something nasty.
tsitlamile - has made a wry face, etc.
tsitlile - was on the verge of crying.
tsitlisa - 00ze; cause to ache.
tsitlisitse - has caused to 00ze; has caused to ache.
tsitlisiwa - being caused to ooze; being caused to ache.
tsitl6 - despising.
tsitlologa - stream out; flow out too abundantly.
tsitlologile - has streamed out; has flowed out too abundantly.
tsitsi - a species of small bird.
tsitsiboga - have a sharp, pungent, acid or tart feeling; stimulate.
tsitsibogile - has woken up troubled, or startled from sleep, etc.; has had a sharp, acid, pungent, or tart feeling.
tsitsibosa - quicken, or rouse; revive a fainting person, or one stunned; produce a sharp, pungent, acidic or tart effect; wake up troubled, or startled from sleep; wake oneself; become roused up, as a lazy, or drowsy person; grimace, as if one has tasted something with sour or acidic taste.
tsitsibositse - has quickened or roused, etc.; has produced sharp, acid, pungent, or tart effect.
tsitsibosiwa - being quickened, or roused; being revived.
tsitsiêla - run slowly.
tsitsietse - has run slowly.
tsitsimatlhanyesa - a large male eland.
tsitsipologa - come up quickly, as grain; stand closely packed, as a crowd; cover the body, as a rash.
tsitsipologile - has come up quickly, as grain, etc.
tsitsiri - 9N-, a bug; a bedbug. 1D. ExPR, O letshwenyo jaaka tsitsiri.
tsitsitlha - (same as "fsikitla"), tickle; poke in the ribs, in play.
tsitsitlhile - (same as "tsikitlhile"), has tickled; has poked in the ribs, in play.
tsêbêtla - sink noisily in mud; tramp noisily in boggy ground.
tsobotlile - has tramped noisily in boggy ground.
tsodiotsôts6 - AND INTENSIFIED FORM tswêêtswêê, please.
tsodisa - undress, or strip another; make bare; expose the person.
tsodisitse - has undressed, or stripped another; has exposed the person.
tsodisitswe - has been undressed, or stripped by another; has been made bare.
tsodisiwa - (same as "tsodiswa being undressed"), or stripped by another; being made bare.
tsoditsodi - 1D., same as fswiditswidi, imitation of a bird; unintelligible.
tsodutsokwane - a pip of an orange; golden colour used for making a pigment for women's faces.
tsofaditse - has caused to become old, or aged, of living things; has caused to age. ee.
tsofaditswe - has been caused to age.
tsofadiwa - (same as "tsofatswa being caused to age").
tsofala - become old, or aged, of living things.
tsofalêla - aged at; become old for.
tsofaletse - has aged at; has become old for.
tsofetse - has become old; has aged.
tsoga - arise; get up; wake up.
tsogêla - arise for; get up very early for; arise early in the mornings; rise up against.
tsogêlêlwana - rise up against one another; be at loggerheads.
tsogêlê - 9N-, resurrection unto; a rising for against, or unto.
tsogêlwa - being risen for; being moody and unpredictable; having a changeable temperament; being risen against.
tsogetse - has risen up against; has arisen early in the morning for.
tsogd - a rising; a resurrection.
tsogologa - strike; rise up as in rebellion; revive; be refreshed; be renewed.
tsogologêla - strike for, or against.
tsogologetse - has struck for or against.
tsogologile - has struck; has risen up, as in rebellion.
tsogolosa - cause to strike or rise up.
tsogolositse - has caused to strike, or rise up; has revived; has refreshed, and set up afresh.
tsogwi - a nighthawk.
tsokeditse - has put round, or caused to go round, a corner.
tsokediwa - (same as "tsoketswa being hidden round a corner"), as something; being curled, or twined around.
tsoketsa - put round, or cause to go round, a corner; hide a thing round a corner.
tsoketso - 9N-, a corner; a turning; a bend; a turning place.
tsokodia - S. Same as tsopodia, circuitous.
tsokodiêga - (same as "tsopodiegile"), make a circuit.
tsokodiegile - (same as "tsopodiegile"), has made a circuit.
tsokodiwa - (same as "tsokotswa"), being rinsed. |.
tsokologa - turn round, same as sokologa.
tsokologile - has turned round.
tsokotsa - rinse.
tsokotsê - has rolled; has eddied.
tsola - S., tasteless; without smell.
tsola - undress; take off an undergarment.
tsolana - take off each other's garments.
tsoletse - has undressed for.
tsoma - hunt.
tsomê - s, stingy; o tsomê, she is stingy.
tsomêla - hunt for.
tsometse - has hunted for.
tsomisa - cause or help to hunt.
tsomisitse - has caused or helped to hunt.
tsomisitswe - has been caused or helped to hunt.
tsomisiwa - being caused to hunt.
tsomiwa - (same as "tsongwa"), being hunted.
tsôma - (same as "tsônê them"),; they.
tsênê - (same as "tsôna them"),; they. tsongwa V.Ss.PAŠs. < fsoma, same as tsomiwa, being hunted.
ts0O - USED WITH CONSTRUCTIONS OF CLS. 8 AND 10, denotes communal possession by a family, or some other social unit; dipitse tsoo mogogi, the horses of mogogi's family.
tsopa - run with a swaying movement; making a noise sounding like tso tso.
tsopana - S.,a motley group, crowd, or number; a sizeable group, crowd, etc.
tsopodia - s.,same as tsokodia, circuitous.
tsopodiêga - same as tsokodiega, make a circuit.
tsopodiegile - (same as "tsokodiegile"), has made a circuit; has meandered.
tsêrêtla - growl; flow unchecked, as blood when a limb is severed.
tsorotlile - has growled; has flowed unchecked, as blood coming out of a severed artery.
tsorotlisa - cause to stream, as a jet of blood; allow saliva to flow unchecked, etc.
tsorotlisitse - has caused blood, saliva, etc., to flow unchecked.
tsorotlisiwa - (same as "tsorotliswa"), being allowed to flow unchecked, as saliva, blood, etc.
tsosa - one of the demi-gods, said to have had a big share, if not the whole part, in forming the destiny of man. 1D. ExPR, go ise go tswa tsose, prehistoric times.
tsosa - raise up; stir up; cause to arise; stimulate.
tsose - the long ago; the Creation; the beginning of history.
tsoseditse - has caused to arise for; has aroused for; has stirred up for.
tsosediwa - (same as "tsosetswa being caused to arise for"),; being aroused for; being stirred up for.
tsoseleditse - has caused to arise; has become stirred, or aroused.
tsoseletsa - revive; stir up against; revive an organisation.
tsosetsa - raise up for; stir up for, etc.
tsosi QUANT. QUAL. OF - S. 8 AND 10, only; alone.
tsositse - has caused to arise; has woken someone or something up; has revived; has raised and erected.
tsositswe - has been caused to arise, revive, etc.; has been awakened; has been raised and made erect.
tsosiwa - (same as "tsoswa"), being raised up; being stirred up.
tsos6 - a waking; a rousing.
tsosologa - revive; become revived, or renewed.
tsosolosa - resuscitate; revive; renew a thing after it has fallen through for a time.
tsosolositse - has resuscitated revived, etc.
tsosolosiwa - (same as "tsosoloswa"), being resuscitated, revived, etc.
tsosolos6 - restitution; restoration; renewal; rally. tsotIhe QUANT. QUAL, USED WITH CONSTRUCTIONS OF S.8 AND 10, all. tšotlhwa_N. USED MAINLY ASA REL.S., be edible, but not fat, spoken of meat in fair condition, or of animals.
tsotologa - appear dissatisfied.
tsotologile - has appeared dissatisfied.
tsotsê - has undressed.
tsotsoana - pick up daintily with the tips of the fingers.
tsotsoba - be finicky.
tsotsobile - was finicky.
tsotsopa - the mud in muddy water.
tsotswê - has been undressed, or disrobed.
tsua - cut the hair unevenly.
tsua - call with a whistling sound, as a number of goats; run round a bird making a whistling noise with a view to fascinate and kill it.
tsuakantsê - has railed.
tsuakanya - rail; silence by scolding.
tsuba - s., dense, as a forest; impenetrable, as bushes; grow thickly, as corn, or hair.
tsubalala - make a rushing sound.
tsubalalê - a rushing sound.
tsubaletse - has made a rushing sound.
tsubua - shake a tree; splash.
tsubugêla - turn the head away and reject.
tsubugetse - has turned the head away and rejected.
tsubugile - has turned the head away and moved away.
tsubuile - has shaken a tree.
tsubukantsê - has acted violently, like the wind, or waves.
tsubukanya - act violently, like the wind or waves.
tsubula - snatch; seize; grab.
tsubulwa - or snatched.
tsubutla - make a rushing sound, as a strong wind, or a dust storm.
tsubutlaka - make a rushing sound, as a strong wind, or a dust storm, much, or for a lengthy period of time.
tsubutlisa - cause a rushing noise.
tsubutlisitse - has caused a rushing noise to be made.
tsubutlisiwa - being caused to make a rushing noise.
tsubutlê - similar to setsuatsue, a blast; a rushing noise; a whirlwind.
tsubutsê - has snatched away grabbed, etc.
tsubutswê - has been grabbed etc.
tsuêga - be hopeless; be given up; become shaved, leaving tufts of hair in between.
tsuegile - has become hopeless; has given up; has become shaved, leaving tufts of hair in between.
tsuêg6 - baldness.
tsuk6 - a horse's or bull's penis.
tsukuntsê - has shaken vigorously.
tsukunya - shake vigorously.
tsunetsa - pinch.
tsuntsunyetsa - 9¢-, suck.
tsuologa - be in a state of rebellion; become rebellious.
tsuologêla - rebel against.
tsuologile - has become rebelled at.
tsuololêla - rebel against.
tsuololê - rebellion.
tsuolotsê - has rebelled.
tsupueditse - has hindered by talking fast; has swished the tail about, like an iguana, etc.
tsupueditswe - has been hindered by talking fast.
tsupuediwa - (same as "tsupuetswa"), being hindered by talking fast.
tsupuetsa - hinder a speaker by talking fast; extinguish a fire; destroy, or bring to nought; veto; swish.
tšusu_ - a cockroach.
tsutla - (same as "fsitla and tswitla"), similar to tsitla, despise; speak against derisively.
tsutlile - etc.
tsutsuba - a parcel.
tsutswa - See tshutshwa, a kind of pox; a syphilitic sore.
tsuulala - swoop down, as a bird of prey; dart down, as a hawk on its prey.
tswa - come out; leave, or desert; stand aloof from a former friend, and forsake his cause; come from; become, as in ba tlaa tswa babetli, they will become carpenters, same as ba tlaa nna babetli.
tswaana - separate from one another. Tswaanyane N.CL.14¢-, proper name of a river in Botswana.
tswadile - commonly spoken as tswetse, has shut, or closed.
tswaise - or flavour.
tswaisiwa - being seasoned flavoured, or sweetened.
tswaisê - flavouring; seasoning; spice.
tswaitswai - (same as "motswaitswai"), plant with edible leaves and root, prefers marshy ground.
tswaka - make a mixture.
tswaketla - a long strip.
tswaketla - make a thing long.
tswakile - has mixed; has made a mixture.
tswala - dress.
tswala - shut; close.
tswalêga - become put on, as clothes etc.
tswalêga - become shut, closed, etc.
tswalegêla - êga, become shut for.
tswalegile - can be worn; was wearable; has become put on, as clothes.
tswalegile - has become closed, or shut.
tswalêla - dress for; wear for.
tswalêla - shut in, or out; close behind.
tswalêlwa - being closed in, or out.
tswaletse - has shut in.
tswaletse - has worn for.
tswaletswe - has been closed in, or out.
tswalolola - rarely used, same as bula which is commonly used, open.
tswalolotsê - rarely used same as butse, has opened that which was closed.
tswalwa - being closed, or shut.
tswalwa - being decently clothed.
tswape - light stroke with a cane, or switch.
tswapeditse - being begged; being lashed a little; has beaten, or lashed a little.
tswapeditswe - has been beaten, or lashed a little.
tswapediwa - (same as "tswapetswa"), being begged; being lashed or beaten a little.
tswapêla - walk in a zigzag manner.
tswapetsa - give a stroke with a light cane.
tswapoga - become insipid; be overdone as a song sung too often; lose strength, as tea leaves used over and over.
tswapogêla - become insipid for.
tswapolêla - abase; debase; dilute for.
tswapoletse - has debased for.
tswapotsê - has made to be insipid; has debased.
tswaralala - come down heavily, as rain.
tswaraletse - have dangled down.
tswatsile - has run to and for.
tswatswa - run to and for; be hospitable.
tswatswa - flatter [doubtful].
tswatswaêla - hold carefully in the hand; provide for; take care of; tender hospitality to.
tswatswaetse - has held carefully in the hand, etc.
tswê - if you please; same as tswêêtswêê.
tswedisa - cause to gather, as water seeping through.
tswedisetsa - has caused to percolate or seep through.
tswedisitso pele - Success; advancement.
tsweditse - has corrupted.
tswêêtswêê - INTER, please; if you please.
tswêla - as water from underground; come out to; go out into. tswêla pelo v. pur, be desirous of; yearn after; be jealous of.
tswele - has dressed; has become clothed or decently covered.
tsweledisa - cause to make progress; cause to go ahead.
tsweledisitse - has caused to progress; has resumed.
tsweledisitswe - has been caused to make progress; has been caused to go ahead.
tsweledisiwa - being caused to make progress.
tswêlêla - go forth; proceed. tswêlêla pele v.pur, advance; go forward; make progress. tswêlêl6_N. cL. 9N-, success; advancement; progress.
tswêlêlêpele - 90-, ING. oF ditswêlêlêpele progress.
tsweletse - has progressed; has gone on one's way.
tsweletse pele v - pHR, Fr. < tswêlêla pele, is advancing; has gone forward; continues to make progress.
tsweletso - 99-, continuous mood (verb); continuation.
tswelwe - are clothed, or decently covered; has been put on, as an undergarment.
tswena - defecate in bits, as when having diarrhoea.
tswenatswena - filter.
tswenatsweneditse - as a little child.
tswenatswenyetsa - speak indistinctly, as a little child.
tswenne - has defecated a bit, as when having diarrhoea.
tswere - AND N.< botswere and ditswere, a house sparrow.
tswesa - dress someone; provide someone with clothes.
tswesitse - has dressed someone; | has provided someone with clothes.
tswesiwa - Šs. < tswesa, being dressed; being provided with clothes.
tsweta - S., soft, as clay.
tswetla - spread out, or erect the hairs on the back, as a springbok when running.
tswetlile - has spread out, or erected as hair on the back of a springbok when running.
tswetsa - corrupt.
tswetse - (same as "tswadile"), which is rarely used, has shut, or closed.
tswetswa - (same as "tswadilwe which is rarely used"),; be shut; has been shut, or closed.
tswetswena - send up sap; spring up, as young grass; ooze; filter through.
tswetswennê - has sent up sap; has oozed. tswinatswina DIAL. VAR. oF tswenatswena, filter.
tswinke - t.9n-, the hollow of the thigh.
tswinyetsa - (same as "fswenyetsa"), pierce.
tswid - ExPR, the sound made by a bird.
tswiri - Sound of a bird's cry.
tswirintsê - has made a whistling noise.
tswirinya - make a whistling noise; chirp.
tswisa - cause to come out, or forth. DER. F. tswa.
tswisitse - has caused to come out, or forth.
tswisiwa - or forth.
tswitla - refuse to hear, or believe; despise.
tswitlile - has refused to hear, accept, or believe; has looked down upon; has despised.
tswiwa - Šs. Same as duwa, being come out of, or from; coming out being done.
tu - ExPR, of silence; of a profound silence; of surprise.
tuba - s., denotes a non-red brown, more like dark sepia-coloured male animal.
tuba - thump, or strike with a fist; beat the ground with a tail, as an ox; this is said to be a bad omen and have the power of bewitching or injury.
tubile - has thumped or struck with a fist ete.
tuduets6 - 9N-, ululation; ululating; applause; a shout of gladness raised by women.
tudukana - make disorganised noises with buckets, etc.
tudukanye - has made a rattling noise.
tuêlêla - pour meal into water in too large a quantity.
tuêlê - reward; payment.
tuêlôlôêt6 - 99, fare.
tuka - catch fire; flame; burn, as a candle. tukabogale v. pur, be angry; flame up, in anger.
tukêla - or for.
tuketse - has taken fire, for.
tukile - has burnt, as a candle.
tukisa - cause to burn, or flame.
tukisitse - has caused to burn, or flame.
tukisitswe - has been caused to burn.
tukisiwa - (same as "tukiswa being caused to burn"),. tukwi_N. CL. 90-, SING. OF ditukwi [borrowed], head scarf.
tule - (same as "tilwe"), go tulwe, it is said.
tulê - a sitting down.
tulwe - (same as "twilwe"), it is said.
tuma - become famous.
tumaikgati - echo.
tumalan6 - a mutual understanding; a mutual agreement.
tumammêg6 - 90-, consonant.
tumanosi - 99-, vowel.
tumarinini - -, alveolar sound.
tumatlhaka - phonic.
tumedi - fame; report; a rumour; an uproar.
tumedis6 - a greeting; a salutation.
tumêla - be famous for, etc.
tumêlêl6 - (same as "tetlelêl6"), permission.
tumêl6 - faith; belief.
tumetse - has become famous for, ete.
tumile - has become, or be famous.
tumisa - boast of, or in; spread reports about; make famous.
tumisitse - has boasted of; has made famous.
tumisitswe - has been boasted of; has been made famous.
tumisiwa - being boasted of, or in; being made famous.
tumê - glory; a noise; fame or notoriety.
tumê6 ya maru_ - thunder.
tumodisa - shut up a person's mouth so as to prevent one from speaking.
tumodisitse - has shut up a person's mouth so as to prevent one from speaking.
tumoga - %-, waterbuck.
tumola - shut the mouth and so refrain | from speaking; be non-commital. | tumologê N.CL.9N-, DER F. tuologa, unbelief; a ceasing to believe. ' tumolola v.s. REV. < fumola, open the mouth to speak.
tumolotsê - has opened the mouth to speak.
tumotsê - has shut the mouth i.e. has refrained from speaking; be dumb; has refrained entirely from speaking.
tumusa - same as tonosa, have the girdle inperfectly fastened; be uncovered, or indecently exposed (of a male).
tumusitse - (same as "fonositse uncovered"), or indecently exposed.
tumusiwa - (same as "tonosiwa being uncovered"), or indecently exposed.
tuntuletsa - (same as "kunkuretsa"), lull the baby so that it does not cry.
tuntwane - a small calabash; a small snuff-box made of leather or bone.
turio - a tower [borrowed].
tutedisitswe - has been caused to fester.
tuteditse - has caused to fester ripen, etc. (of a boil or wound).
tutediwa - (same as "tutetswa being caused to fester").
tutêla - be angry.
tutêla - become mature for opening, as a boil, etc.; fester.
tutêlêla - become mature for opening, as a boil, etc.; fester for.
tutetsa - êla, cause to become mature, as a boil.
tutetse - has become mature, as a boil.
tutubologa - spring up quickly, as a mushroom.
tutubologile - has sprung up quickly, as a mushroom.
tutuga - (used of all living things).
tutugile - has grown.
tutuma - become inflamed; become feverish.
tutumetsa - (same as "thuthumetsa"), pierce.
tutumile - has flared, as a large fire.
tutum6 - a fever; inflammation.
tutumologa - erupt; disperse quickly.
tutumologile - has erupted; has dispersed quickly.
tutuntshwane - (same as "thuthuntshwane which is commonly used"), a fungus; a mushroom.
tuu - ExPR, of silence; quiet; loneliness.
tuulala - be silent when spoken to; be still or quiet; be motionless.
tuulalê - silence; quietness; stillness.
tuuletse - has become silent when spoken to; has become non-committal. twa DIAL. VAR OF (we, rarely used, it is said. twalôê DIALVaAR. oF tualo, rarely used, it is said.
twantshamalwetsi - 9N-, antibiotic.
twatsi - germ.
twe - as in ga twe, it is said.
twene - a barbel (fish).
