uba - throb; throb with pain; palpitate; pulsate; to strike with a fist; beat so as to wound.
ubana - or strike each other with fists.
ubanye - have struck, or beaten each other with fists.
ubêla - pump up a tyre; blow on a fire.
ubetse - has pumped bellows.
ubugêla - as an oppressed chest for; pant for.
ubugile - has heaved, as an oppressed chest.
ubula - strike, with a staff, etc.
ubutsê - has struck, with a staff etc.; has taken forcefully from another.
ubuya - heave, as an oppressed chest; breathe hard, or with difficulty; pant; jerk.
udubaditse - has shaken out as dust from a skin, carpet, etc.
udubaditswe - has been shaken out, as dust from a skin, carpet, etc.
udubadiwa - being shaken out, as dust from a skin, carpet, etc.
udubala - become bare, as a field at the end of the harvest; be shaken out, as dust from a skin, carpet, etc.
udubatsa - shake out, as dust from a skin, carpet, etc.; similar to uputsa, gather everything, as a crop at harvesting time; rob one of everything; break down.
udupana - similar to kKudupana, shrivel up.
udupantsê - has caused to shrivel up; has seized with a tight grip; has lain violent hands on.
udupanya - cause to shrivel up; seize with a tight grip; lay violent hands on.
udupanye - has shrivelled up.
ukantsê - has inspected.
uma - (same as "ima"), be fruitful, or conceive, as a woman.
umaka - mention by name; speak lightly or casually about.
umakêla - mention to; speak about to.
umaketse - has mentioned to.
umakile - has mentioned; has mentioned by name.
umakilwe - has been mentioned.
una - denude; kill bit by bit, or one at a time.
ungwa - bear fruit, as a tree, etc.
ungwile - has borne fruit.
ungwisitse - has caused to bear fruit.
ungwisiwa - being caused to bear fruit; make fruitful (of land).
ungwuloga - be unfruitful.
ungwulogile - has been unfruitful; is unfruitful.
unnê - has taken everyting out of a place.
untsê - has peeped out and drawn back again, as a tortoise its head.
unya - peep out and draw back again, as a tortoise its head; appear above the surface and then disappear again.
upa - protect a house with medicinal charms.
upalala - sit in silence; sit silently.
upaletse - sat in silence.
upeleditse - has caused to sprinkle or smear with witchcraft medicine.
upêlêla - sprinkle or smear with witchcraft medicine.
upeletsa - cause to sprinkle or smear with witchcraft medicine.
upeletse - has sprinkled or smeared with witchcraft medicine.
upilwe - has been protected with bewitching medicine.
upiwa - as charms to destroy or keep away birds; being protected by medicine or charms, as a house.
upologa - become of no effect, as the medicine of a witchdoctor.
upologile - have become of no effect, as the medicine of a witchdoctor.
upolola - undo the effects, or prevent the action of witchcraft medicine on garden or house.:.
upolotsê - has undone the effects of, or prevented damage being done.
uputsa - similar to udubatsa, gather the remaining bits of harvest from a field or garden.
urane - uranium [borrowed].
usa - cause to fall.
usana - cause one another to fall.
useditse - has caused to fall into or towards.
useditswe - has been caused to fall into, or towards.
usediwa - being caused to fall into, or towards.
usetsa - cause to fall to, or towards.
usiwa - being made to fall; being dropped or thrown down.
utla - snatch something.
utlile - has snatched something.
utlule - (same as "utlwile"), has heard, felt, obeyed, understood, etc.
utlulwe - (same as "utlwilwe"), has been heard, felt, etc.
utlusa - (same as "utlwisa"), cause to hear, or obey; inform; let another have a taste of; whet the appetite of.
utlusitse - (same as "utlwisitse"), has caused to hear, etc.; has whetted the appetite of.
utlusitswe - has been made to hear, etc.
utlusiwa - (same as "utlwisiwa being made to hear"), taste, etc.
utluwa - (same as "utlwiwa"), being heard, obeyed, etc.; being tasted for seasoning, etc.
utlwa - hear; feel; understand; obey; taste; smell. utlwa botlhoko 1p. Expr, feel sorry; be in pain.
utlwaditse - has made audible; make known or evident, through hearing.
utlwadiwa - being made audible.
utlwala - be audible; be evident; be heard of; taste, as salt in meat.
utlwalêla - utlwa, hear about; gather news about.
utlwaletse - has heard about.
utlwaletswe - has been heard about; news has been gathered about the whereabouts of.
utlwana - lit., hear one another; be of one mind; live in harmony; sympathise; have an understanding with.
utlwanye - became of one mind; live in harmony.
utlwatsa - make audible; make known or evident, through hearing; carry tidings; express.
utlwêga_ - be audible; be heard; be understood, or be understandable.
utlwegile - was heard; became understood.
utlwêla - listen on behalf of; feel for; hear about. utlwêla botlhoko 1p. exer, similar to tlhomogêla pelo, feel sorry for; take pity on.
utlwêlana - êla, feel sorry for each other. utlwêlana botlhoko 1. expr, sympathise with each other.
utlwetse - has heard; has understood fully.
utlwile - (same as "utlule"), has heard, felt obeyed, understood, etc.
utlwisa - (same as "uflusa"), cause to hear or obey; inform; let another have a taste of; whet the appetite of.
utlwisitse - (same as "utlusitse has caused to hear"), etc.; has whetted the appetite of.
utlwisitswe - has been made to hear, etc.
utlwisiwa - (same as "utlusiwa being made to hear"), taste, etc.
utlwiwa - being heard obeyed, etc.; being tasted for seasoning, etc.
utsule - (same as "utswile"), has stolen.
utsulwe - has been stolen.
utsusa - (same as "utswisa"), accuse of theft, or of stealing.
utsusitse - (same as "utswisitse"), has accused of theft.
utsuwa - (same as "utswiwa"), being stolen.
utswa - steal; pilfer.
utsweditse - (same as "utswetse has stolen for or from").
utswediwa - (same as "utswetswa"), being stolen for or from.
utswêla - steal for or from.
utswêlwa - (same as "utswetswa being stolen for or from").
utswetsa - (same as "utswêla"), steal or pilfer from or for.
utswetse - (same as "utsweditse has stolen for or from").
utswetswa - (same as "utswêlwa being stolen for or from").
utswetswe - (same as "utswediwa"), has been stolen from.
utswile - (same as "utsule"), has stolen.
utswilwe - (same as "utswile same as utsulwe"), has been stolen.
utswisa - help or cause to steal; accuse of stealing.
utswisitse - (same as "utsusitse has helped or caused to steal"),; has accused of theft.
utswisiwa - (same as "utsusiwa being helped or caused to steal"),; being accused of theft.
utswiwa - (same as "utsuwa"), being stolen.
